Title: Sunni Islam
Sunni Islam () is the largest branch of Islam, followed by 85–90% of the world's Muslims, and simultaneously the largest religious denomination in the world. Its name comes from the word "Sunnah", referring to the tradition of Muhammad. The differences between Sunni and Shia Muslims arose from a disagreement over the succession to Muhammad and subsequently acquired broader political significance, as well as theological and juridical dimensions. According to Sunni traditions, Muhammad left no successor and the participants of the Saqifah event appointed Abu Bakr as the next-in-line (the first caliph). This contrasts with the Shia view, which holds that Muhammad appointed his son-in-law and cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib as his successor.
The adherents of Sunni Islam are referred to in Arabic as ' ("the people of the Sunnah and the community") or ' for short. In English, its doctrines and practices are sometimes called Sunnism, while adherents are known as Sunni Muslims, Sunnis, Sunnites and Ahlus Sunnah. Sunni Islam is sometimes referred to as "orthodox Islam", though some scholars view this translation as inappropriate, and many Sunnis may find this offensive.
The Quran, together with hadith (especially those collected in Kutub al-Sittah) and binding juristic consensus, form the basis of all traditional jurisprudence within Sunni Islam. Sharia rulings are derived from these basic sources, in conjunction with analogical reasoning, consideration of public welfare and juristic discretion, using the principles of jurisprudence developed by the traditional legal schools. In matters of creed, the Sunni tradition upholds the six pillars of "imān" (faith) and comprises the Ash'ari and Maturidi schools of Kalam (theology) as well as the textualist school known as traditionalist theology.
Terminology.
Sunna.
The Arabic term "Sunna", according to which Sunnis are named, is old and roots in pre-Islamic language. It was used for traditions which a majority of people followed. The term got greater political significance after the murder of the third Sunni Caliph ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān. It is said Mālik al-Aschtar, a famous follower of ʿAlī ibn Abī Tālib, encouraged during the battle of Siffin with the expression, Ali's enemy Muʿāwiya ibn Abī Sufyān kills the "Sunna". After the battle, it was agreed that "the righteous "Sunnah", the unifying, not the divisive" ("as-Sunna al-ʿādila al-ǧāmiʿa ġair al-mufarriqa") should be consulted to resolve the conflict. The time when the term "sunna" became the short form for "Sunnah of the Prophet" (S"unnat an-Nabī") is still unknown. During the Umayyad Caliphate, several political movements, including the Shia and the Kharijites rebelled against the formation of the state. They led their battles in the name of "the book of God ("Qur'an") and the "Sunnah" of his Prophet". During the second Civil War (680–92) the Sunna-term received connotations critical of Shi'i doctrines ("Tashayyu"'). It is recorded by Masrūq ibn al-Adschdaʿ (d. 683), who was a "Mufti" in Kufa, a need to love the first two caliphs Abū Bakr and ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb and acknowledge their priority ("Fadā'il"). A disciple of Masrūq, the scholar ash-Shaʿbī (d. between 721 und 729), who first sided with the Shia in Kufa during Civil War, but turned away in disgust by their fanaticism and finally decided to join the Umayyad Caliph ʿAbd al-Malik, popularized the concept of "Sunnah". It is also passed down by asch-Shaʿbī, that he took offensive at the hatred on ʿĀʾiša bint Abī Bakr and considered it a violation of the "Sunnah".
The term "Sunna" instead of the longer expression "ahl as-sunna" or "ahl as-sunnah wa l-jamāʻah" as a group-name for Sunnis is a relatively young phenomenon. It was probably Ibn Taymiyyah, who used the short-term for the first time. It was later popularized by pan-Islamic scholars such as Muhammad Rashid Rida in his treatise "as-Sunna wa-š-šiʿa au al-Wahhābīya wa-r-Rāfiḍa: Ḥaqāʾiq dīnīya taʾrīḫīya iǧtimaʿīya iṣlaḥīya" ("The Sunna and the Shia, Or Wahhabism and Rāfidism: Religious history, sociological und reform oriented facts") published in 1928–29. The term "Sunnah" is usually used in Arabic discourse as designation for Sunni Muslims, when they are intended to be contrasted with Shias. The word pair "Sunnah-Shia" is also used on Western research literature to denote the Sunni-Shia contrast.
Ahl as-Sunna.
One of the earliest supporting documents for "ahl as-sunna" derives from the Basric scholar Muhammad Ibn Siri (d. 728). His is mentioned in the "Sahih" of Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj quoted with: "Formerly one did not ask about the Isnad. But when the "fitna" started, one said: 'Name us your informants'. One would then respond to them: If they were Sunnah people, you accept their hadith. But if they are people of the Innovations, the hadith was rejected." G.H.A. Juynboll assumed, the term "fitna" in this statement is not related to the first Civil War (665–661) after murder of ʿUthmān ibn ʿAffān, but the second Civil War (680–692) in which the Islamic community was split into four parties (Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, the Umayyads, the Shia under al-Mukhtār ibn Abī ʿUbaid and the Kharijites). The term "ahl as-sunna" designated in this situation whose, who stayed away from heretic teachings of the different warring parties.
The term "ahl as-sunna" was always a laudatory designation. Abu Hanifa (d. 769), who sympathized with Murdshia, insisted that this were "righteous people and people of the Sunnah" ("ahl al-ʿadl wa-ahl as-sunna"). According to Josef van Ess this term did not mean more than "honorable and righteous believing people". Among Hanafits the designation "ahl as-sunna" and "ahl al-ʿadl" (people of the righteous) remained interchangeable for a long time. Thus the Hanafite Abū l-Qāsim as-Samarqandī (d. 953), who composed a catechism for the Samanides, used sometimes one expression and sometimes another for his own group.
Singular to "ahl as-sunna" was "ṣāḥib sunna" (adherent to the sunnah). This expression was used for example by ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Mubārak (d. 797) for a person, who distances himself from the teachings of Shia, Kharijites, Qadarites and Murjites. In addition, the Nisba adjective "sunnī" was also used for the individual person. Thus it has been recorded, the Kufic scholar of the Quran Abū Bakr ibn ʿAyyāsh (d. 809) was asked, how he was a "sunni". He responded the following: "The one who, when the heresies are mentioned, doesn't get excited about any of them." The Andalusiaian scholar Ibn Hazm (d. 1064) taught later, that whose who confess to Islam can be divided into four groups: "ahl as-sunna", Mutazilites, Murjites, Shites, Kharijites. The Muʿtazilites replaced the Qadarites here.
In the 9th century, one started to extent the term "ahl as-sunna" with further positive additions. Abu al-Hasan al-Ashari used for his own group expressions like "ahl as-sunna wa-l-istiqāma" ("people of Sunna and Straightness"), "ahl as-sunna wa-l-ḥadīṯ" ("people of Sunnah and of the Hadith") or "ahl al-ḥaqq wa-s-sunna" ("people of Truth and of the Sunnah").
Ahl as-Sunna wa l-Jamāʻah.
When the expression 'ahl as-sunna wa l-jama'ah appeared for the first time, is not entirely clear. The Abbasite Caliph Al-Ma'mūn (reigned 813–33) criticized in his Mihna edict a group of people, who related themselves to the sunnah ("nasabū anfusa-hum ilā s-sunna") and claimed, they are the "people of truth, religion and community" ("ahl al-ḥaqq wa-d-dīn wa-l-jamāʿah"). "Sunna" and "jamāʿah" are already connected here. As a pair, these terms already appear in the 9th century. It is recorded that the disciple of Ahmad ibn Hanbal Harb ibn Ismail as-Sirjdshani (d. 893) created a writing with the title "as-Sunna wa l-Jamāʿah", to which the Mutazilite Abu al-Qasim al-Balchi wrote a refutation later. Al-Jubba'i (d. 916) tells in his "Kitāb al-Maqālāt", that Ahmad ibn Hanbal attributed to his students the predicate "sunnī jamāʿah" ("Jammatic Sunnite"). This indicates that the Hanbalis were the first to use the phrase "ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah" as a self-designation.
But also the Karramiyya founded by Muhammad ibn Karram (d. 859) referred to the sunnah and community. They passed down for praise of their schoolfounder a hadith, according to which the prophet Muhammad predicted that at the end of times a man named Muhammad ibn Karram will appear, who will restore the sunna and the community ("as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah") and take Hidraj from Chorasan to Jerusalem, just how Muhammad himself took a Hidraj from Mecca to Medina. According to the testimony of the transoxanian scholar Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi (d. 1099) the Kullabites (followers of the Basrian scholar Ibn Kullab (d. 855)) dayed about themselves, that they are among the "ahl as-sunna wa l-jama" too.
Abu al-Hasan al-Ashari used the expression "ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah" rarely, and preferred another combination. Later Asharites like al-Isfaranini (d. 1027) nad Abd al-Qahir al-Baghdadi (d. 1078) used the expression "ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah" too and used them in their works to designate the teachings of their own school. According to al-Bazdawi all Asharites in his time said they belong to the "ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah". During this time, the term has been used as a self-designation by the hanafite Maturidites in Transoxiania, used frequently by Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi (d. 983), Abu Schakur as-Salimi (d. 1086) and al-Bazdawi himself. They used the term as a contrast from their enemies among them Hanafites in the West, who have been followers of the Mutazilites. Al-Bazdawī also contrasted the "Ahl as-Sunnah wa l-Jamāʻah" with "Ahl al-Ḥadīth", "because they would adhere to teachings contrary to the Quran".
According to Schams ad-Dīn al-Maqdisī (end of the 10th century) was the expression "ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah" a laudatory term during his time, similar to "ahl al-ʿadl wa-t-tawḥīd" ("people of Righteousness and Divine Unity"), which was used for Mutazilites or generally designations like Mu'minūn ("Believer") or "aṣḥāb al-hudā" ("people of guidance") for Muslims, who has been seen as rightoues believers. Since the expression "ahl as-sunna wa l-jamāʿah" was used with a demand on rightoues belief, it was used in academic researches translated as "orthodox".
There are different opinions regarding what the term "jama" in the phrase "ahl as-sunna wa l-jama" actually means, among Muslim scholars. In the Sunni Creed by at-Tahawi (d. 933), the term "jama" contrasts several times the Arabic term "furqa" ("division, sectarianism"). Thus at-Tahāwī explains that "jama" is considered as true or right ("ḥaqq wa-ṣawāb") and "furqa" as aberration and punishment ("zaiġ wa-ʿaḏāb"). Ibn Taymiyyah argues, that "jama" as opposite term to "furqa" inherents the meaning of "iǧtimāʿ" ("Coming together, being together, agreement"). Furthermore, he connects it with the principle of Ijma, a third juridical source after the Book (Quran), and the Sunnah. The Ottoman scholar Muslih ad-Din al-Qastallani (d. 1495) held the opinnion that "jama" means "Path of the Sahaba" ("ṭarīqat aṣ-ṣaḥāba"). The modern Indonesian theologican Nurcholish Madjid (d. 2005) interpreted "jama" as an inclusivistic concept: It means a society open for pluralism and dialogue but does not emphasize that much.
History.
