Title: Week
A week is a unit of time equal to seven days. It is the standard time period used for short cycles of days in most parts of the world. The days are often used to indicate common work days and rest days, as well as days of worship. Weeks are often mapped against yearly calendars, but are typically not the basis for them, as weeks are not based on astronomy.
The origins of the modern seven-day week can be traced back to the Babylonians. Other ancient cultures had different week lengths, including ten in Egypt and an eight-day week for Etruscans. The Etruscan week was adopted by the Ancient Romans, but they later moved to a seven-day week, which had spread across Western Asia and the Eastern Mediterranean. In 321 AD, Emperor Constantine officially decreed a seven-day week in the Roman Empire, including making Sunday a public holiday. This later spread across Europe, then the rest of the world.
In English, the names of the days of the week are Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. In many languages, the days of the week are named after gods or planets visible to the eye. Such a week may be called a "planetary week". Certain weeks within a year may be designated for a particular purpose, such as Holy Week in Christianity, Golden Week in China, and National Family Week in Canada. More informally, certain groups may advocate awareness weeks, which are designed to draw attention to a certain subject or cause. The term "week" may also be used to refer to a sub-section of the week, such as the workweek and weekend.
Cultures vary in which days of the week are designated the first and the last, though virtually all have Saturday, Sunday or Monday as the first day. The Geneva-based ISO standards organization uses Monday as the first day of the week in its ISO week date system through the international ISO 8601 standard. Most of Europe and China consider Monday the first day of the week, most of North America and South Asia consider Sunday the first day, while Saturday is judged as the first day of the week in much of the Middle East and North Africa. Other regions are mixed, but typically observe either Sunday or Monday as the first day. The Jewish week ends with nightfall on Saturday, at the conclusion of the Sabbath, following the Hebrew Bible in which God created the world in six days and rested on the seventh. Most Christians set their Sabbath to Sunday (the Lord's Day) because it is the first day of the week in traditional Christian calendars and Bible verse says it's the day Jesus was raised from the dead. Muslims set their Sabbath to Friday because it was described as a sacred day of congregational worship in the Quran.
Name.
The English word "week" comes from the Old English , ultimately from a Common Germanic ', from a root ' "turn, move, change". The Germanic word probably had a wider meaning prior to the adoption of the Roman calendar, perhaps "succession series", as suggested by Gothic translating "order" in Luke 1:8.
The seven-day week is named in many languages by a word derived from "seven". The archaism sennight ("seven-night") preserves the old Germanic practice of reckoning time by nights, as in the more common "fortnight" ("fourteen-night"). Hebdomad and hebdomadal week both derive from the Greek (, "a seven"). Septimana is cognate with the Romance terms derived from Latin ("seven mornings").
Slavic has a formation *tъ(žь)dьnь (Serbian , Croatian , Ukrainian , Czech , Polish ), from *tъ "this" + *dьnь "day". Chinese has , as it were "planetary time unit". 
An older Chinese form is , meaning "week, religious ceremony."
Definition and duration.
A week is defined as an interval of exactly seven days, so that, except when passing through daylight saving time transitions or leap seconds,
With respect to the Gregorian calendar:
In a Gregorian mean year, there are 365.2425 days, and thus exactly or 52.1775 weeks (unlike the Julian year of 365.25 days or ≈ 52.1786 weeks, which cannot be represented by a finite decimal expansion). There are exactly 20,871 weeks in 400 Gregorian years, so was a just as was .
Relative to the path of the Moon, a week is 23.659% of an average lunation or 94.637% of an average quarter lunation.
Historically, the system of dominical letters (letters A to G identifying the weekday of the first day of a given year) has been used to facilitate calculation of the day of week.
The day of the week can be easily calculated given a date's Julian day number (JD, i.e. the integer value at noon UT):
Adding one to the remainder after dividing the Julian day number by seven (JD "modulo" 7 + 1) yields that date's ISO 8601 day of the week. For example, the Julian day number of is . Calculating yields , corresponding to . In 1973, John Conway devised the Doomsday rule for mental calculation of the weekday of any date in any year.
Days of the week.
The days of the week were named for the seven classical planets, which included the Sun and Moon. This naming system persisted alongside an "ecclesiastical" tradition of numbering the days in ecclesiastical Latin beginning with "Dominica" (the Lord's Day) as the first day. The Greco-Roman gods associated with the classical planets were rendered in their "interpretatio germanica" at some point during the late Roman Empire, yielding the Germanic tradition of names based on indigenous deities.
