Title: Kabir Bedi
Kabir Bedi (born 16 January 1946) is an Indian actor. His career has spanned three continents covering India, the United States and especially Italy among other European countries in three media: film, television and theatre. He is noted for his role as Emperor Shah Jahan in "" and the villainous Sanjay Verma in the 1980s blockbuster "Khoon Bhari Maang". He is best known in Italy and Europe for playing the pirate "Sandokan" in the popular Italian TV miniseries and for his role as the villainous Gobinda in the 1983 James Bond film "Octopussy". Bedi is based in India and lives in Mumbai.
Early life and education.
Kabir Bedi was born in Lahore in the Punjab Province of British India (now in Punjab, Pakistan) on 16 January 1946. His father, Baba Pyare Lal Singh Bedi, was a Punjabi Sikh author, philosopher and a direct descendent of Guru Nanak. His mother, Freda Bedi, was an English woman born in Derby, England, who became famous as the first Western woman to take ordination in Tibetan Buddhism. He was educated at Sherwood College, Nainital, Uttarakhand, and St. Stephen's College, Delhi.
Career.
Bedi began his career in Indian theatre and then moved on to Hindi films. He remains one of the first international actors from India who started out in Hindi films, worked in Hollywood films and became a star in Europe.
Stage acting.
As a stage actor, Bedi has performed Shakespeare's "Othello" as well as portrayed a historical Indian king in "Tughlaq", and a self-destructive alcoholic in "The Vultures". In London he starred in "The Far Pavilions", the West End musical adaptation of M. M. Kaye's novel, at the Shaftesbury Theatre.
In 2011 Bedi played Emperor Shah Jahan in "Taj", a play written by John Murrell, a Canadian playwright for the Luminato Festival in Toronto. In 2013, this play was recommissioned and went on an eight-week multi-city tour of Canada.
Film career.
In the James Bond film "Octopussy", Bedi played the villain's aide Gobinda.
He has acted in over 60 Indian films. In the historical epic "", he starred as the Emperor Shah Jahan. Other starring Hindi film roles include Raj Khosla's "Kacche Dhaage", Rakesh Roshan's "Khoon Bhari Maang" and Farah Khan's "Main Hoon Na".
Bedi shot a movie with Hrithik Roshan ("Kites"), Govinda ("Showman"), and Akshay Kumar ("Blue"). He also starred in Deepa Mehta's film, "Kamagata Maru" with Amitabh Bachchan and John Abraham. He acted in the Tamil film "Aravaan", directed by Vasanthabalan.
Bedi played roles in Columbia Pictures' "The Beast of War", a film on the Russian war in Afghanistan, directed by Kevin Reynolds, as well as the acclaimed Italian film "Andata Ritorno", by Marco Ponti, winner of the David di Donatello Award.
In 2017, he acted in the Telugu historical movie "Gautamiputra Satakarni", as Nahapana, an important ruler of the Western Kshatrapas.
Television career.
Bedi has appeared on American television, in Hallmark's African epic "Forbidden Territory", and Ken Follett's "On Wings of Eagles" and "Red Eagle". He played Friar Sands in "The Lost Empire", for NBC. He also acted in "Dynasty", "Murder, She Wrote", "Magnum, P.I.", "Hunter", "Knight Rider" and "".
In Europe, his greatest success was "Sandokan", the saga of a romantic Southeast Asian pirate during British colonial times, an Italian-German-French TV series which broke viewership records across Europe. He recently starred in a prime-time Italian television series, "Un Medico in Famiglia", on RAI TV.
For over a year, Bedi starred in "The Bold and the Beautiful", the second most-watched television show in the world, seen by over a billion people in 149 countries.
He had his own cinematic talk show on Indian TV, "Director's Cut", a 13-part special series interviewing the country's leading directors. His success on television continued in 2013 with award-winning prime-time shows "Guns and Glory: The Indian Soldier" and "Vandemataram", for India's news channels Headlines Today and Aaj Tak.
