Title: Woman
A woman is an adult female human. Before adulthood, one is referred to as a girl (a female child or adolescent).
Typically, women inherit a pair of X chromosomes, one from each parent, and are capable of pregnancy and giving birth from puberty until menopause. More generally, sex differentiation of the female fetus is governed by the lack of a present, or functioning, SRY-gene on either one of the respective sex chromosomes. Female anatomy is distinguished from male anatomy by the female reproductive system, which includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, vagina, and vulva. An adult woman generally has a wider pelvis, broader hips, and larger breasts than an adult man. Women typically have less facial and other body hair, have a higher body fat composition, and are on average shorter and less muscular than men.
Throughout human history, traditional gender roles have often defined and limited women's activities and opportunities, resulting in gender inequality; many religious doctrines and legal systems stipulate certain rules for women. With restrictions loosening during the 20th century in many societies, women have gained wider access to careers and the ability to pursue higher education. Violence against women, whether within families or in communities, has a long history and is primarily committed by men. Some women are denied reproductive rights. The movements and ideologies of feminism have a shared goal of achieving gender equality.
Trans women have a gender identity that does not align with their sex assignment at birth as male, while intersex women may have sex characteristics that do not fit typical notions of female biology.
Etymology.
The spelling of "woman" in English has progressed over the past millennium from to "wīmmann" to "wumman", and finally, the modern spelling "woman". In Old English, meant (literally ), whereas meant . had a gender-neutral meaning of , corresponding to Modern English or ; however, subsequent to the Norman Conquest, "man" began to be used more in reference to , and by the late 13th century it had begun to eclipse usage of the older term . The medial labial consonants f and m in coalesced into the modern form "woman", while the initial element , which had also meant , underwent semantic narrowing to the sense of a married woman ().
It is a popular misconception that the term "woman" is etymologically connected to "womb". "Womb" derives from the Old English word meaning (cognate to the modern German colloquial term "" from Old High German for ).
Terminology.
The word "woman" can be used generally, to mean any female human, or specifically, to mean an adult female human as contrasted with "girl". The word "girl" originally meant "young person of either sex" in English; it was only around the beginning of the 16th century that it came to mean specifically a "female" child. The term "girl" is sometimes used colloquially to refer to a young or unmarried woman; however, during the early 1970s, feminists challenged such use because the use of the word to refer to a fully grown woman may cause offence. In particular, previously common terms such as "office girl" are no longer widely used. Conversely, in certain cultures which link family honor with female virginity, the word "girl" (or its equivalent in other languages) is still used to refer to a never-married woman; in this sense it is used in a fashion roughly analogous to the more-or-less obsolete English "maid" or "maiden". Different countries have different laws, but age 18 is frequently considered the age of majority (the age at which a person is legally considered an adult).
The social sciences' views on what it means to be a woman have changed significantly since the early 20th century as women gained more rights and greater representation in the workforce, with scholarship in the 1970s moving toward a focus on the sex–gender distinction and social construction of gender.
There are various words used to refer to the quality of being a woman. The term "womanhood" merely means the state of being a woman; "femininity" is used to refer to a set of typical female qualities associated with a certain attitude to gender roles; "womanliness" is like "femininity", but is usually associated with a different view of gender roles. "Distaff" is an archaic adjective derived from women's conventional role as a spinner, now used only as a deliberate archaism.
Menarche, the onset of menstruation, occurs on average at age 12–13. Many cultures have rites of passage to symbolize a girl's coming of age, such as confirmation in some branches of Christianity, bat mitzvah in Judaism, or a custom of a special celebration for a certain birthday (generally between 12 and 21), like the quinceañera of Latin America.
Biology.
Male and female bodies have some differences. Some differences, such as the external sex organs, are visible, while other differences, such as internal anatomy and genetic characteristics, are not visible.
Genetic characteristics.
Typically, the cells of female humans contain two X chromosomes, while the cells of male humans have an X and a Y chromosome. During early fetal development, all embryos have phenotypically female genitalia up until week 6 or 7, when a male embryo's gonads differentiate into testes due to the action of the SRY gene on the Y chromosome. Sex differentiation proceeds in female humans in a way that is independent of gonadal hormones. Because humans inherit mitochondrial DNA only from the mother's ovum, genealogical researchers can trace maternal lineage far back in time.
Hormonal characteristics, menstruation and menopause.
Female puberty triggers bodily changes that enable sexual reproduction via fertilization. In response to chemical signals from the pituitary gland, the ovaries secrete hormones that stimulate maturation of the body, including increased height and weight, body hair growth, breast development and menarche (the onset of menstruation).
Most girls go through menarche between ages 12–13, and are then capable of becoming pregnant and bearing children. Pregnancy generally requires internal fertilization of the eggs with sperm, via either sexual intercourse or artificial insemination, though in vitro fertilization allows fertilization to occur outside the human body. Humans are similar to other large mammals in that they usually give birth to a single offspring per pregnancy, but are unusual in being altricial compared to most other large mammals, meaning young are undeveloped at time of birth and require the aid of their parents or guardians to fully mature. Sometimes humans have multiple births, most commonly twins.
