Title: Chicano
Chicano (masculine form) or Chicana (feminine form) is an ethnic identity for Mexican Americans who have a non-Anglo self-image, embracing their Mexican Native ancestry. "Chicano" was originally a classist and racist slur used toward low-income Mexicans that was reclaimed in the 1940s among youth who belonged to the Pachuco and Pachuca subculture. In the 1960s, "Chicano" was widely reclaimed in the building of a movement toward political empowerment, ethnic solidarity, and pride in being of indigenous descent (with many using the Nahuatl language or names). "Chicano" developed its own meaning separate from "Mexican American" identity. Youth in "barrios" rejected cultural assimilation into whiteness and embraced their own identity and worldview as a form of empowerment and resistance. The community forged an independent political and cultural movement, sometimes working alongside the Black power movement. 
The Chicano Movement faltered by the mid-1970s as a result of external and internal pressures. It was under state surveillance, infiltration, and repression by U.S. government agencies, informants, and agent provocateurs, such as through COINTELPRO. The Chicano Movement also had a fixation on masculine pride and machismo that fractured the community through sexism toward Chicanas and homophobia toward queer Chicana/os. In the 1980s, assimilation and economic mobility motivated many to embrace "Hispanic" identity in an era of conservatism. The term "Hispanic" emerged from a collaboration between the U.S. government and Mexican-American political elites in the Hispanic Caucus of Congress. Likewise, the same assimilatory force associated with "Hispanic" has been tied to the usage of "Latino". They used the term to identify themselves and the community with mainstream American culture, depart from "Chicanismo," and distance themselves from what they perceived as the "militant" Black Caucus.At the grassroots level, Chicana/os continued to build the feminist, gay and lesbian, and anti-apartheid movements, which kept the identity politically relevant. After a decade of "Hispanic" dominance, Chicana/o student activism in the early 1990s recession and the anti-Gulf War movement revived the identity with a demand to expand Chicana/o studies programs. Chicanas were active at the forefront, despite facing critiques from "movement loyalists", as they did in the Chicano Movement. Chicana feminists addressed employment discrimination, environmental racism, healthcare, sexual violence, and exploitation in their communities and in solidarity with the Third World. Chicanas worked to "liberate her "entire people""; not to oppress men, but to be equal partners in the movement. "Xicanisma", coined by Ana Castillo in 1994, called for Chicana/os to "reinsert the forsaken feminine into our consciousness", to embrace one's Indigenous roots, and support Indigenous sovereignty.
In the 2000s, earlier traditions of anti-imperialism in the Chicano Movement were expanded. Building solidarity with undocumented immigrants became more important, despite issues of legal status and economic competitiveness sometimes maintaining distance between groups. U.S. foreign interventions abroad were connected with domestic issues concerning the rights of undocumented immigrants in the United States. Chicano/a consciousness increasingly became transnational and transcultural, thinking beyond and bridging with communities over political borders. The identity was renewed based on Indigenous and decolonial consciousness, cultural expression, resisting gentrification, defense of immigrants, and the rights of women and queer people. "Xicanx" identity also emerged in the 2010s, based on the Chicana feminist intervention of "Xicanisma".
Etymology.
The etymology of the term "Chicano" is the subject of some debate by historians. Some believe "Chicano" is a Spanish language derivative of an older Nahuatl word "Mexitli" ("Meh-shee-tlee"). Mexitli formed part of the expression "Huitzilopochtlil Mexitli"—a reference to the historic migration of the Mexica people from their homeland of Aztlán to the Valley of Mexico. Mexitli is the root of the word "Mexica", which refers to the Mexica people, and its singular form "Mexihcatl" (). The "x" in Mexihcatl represents an /ʃ/ or "sh" sound in both Nahuatl and early modern Spanish, while the glottal stop in the middle of the Nahuatl word disappeared.
The word "Chicano" may derive from the loss of the initial syllable of "Mexicano" (Mexican). According to Villanueva, "given that the velar (x) is a palatal phoneme (S) with the spelling (sh)," in accordance with the Indigenous phonological system of the Mexicas ("Meshicas"), it would become "Meshicano" or "Mechicano." In this explanation, "Chicano" comes from the "xicano" in "Mexicano." Some Chicanos replace the "Ch" with the letter "X", or "Xicano", to reclaim the Nahuatl "sh" sound. The first two syllables of "Xicano" are therefore in Nahuatl while the last syllable is Castilian.
In Mexico's Indigenous regions, Indigenous people refer to members of the non-indigenous majority as "mexicanos", referring to the modern nation of Mexico. Among themselves, the speaker identifies by their ' (village or tribal) identity, such as Mayan, Zapotec, Mixtec, Huastec, or any of the other hundreds of indigenous groups. A newly emigrated Nahuatl speaker in an urban center might have referred to his cultural relatives in this country, different from himself, as ', shortened to "Chicanos" or "Xicanos."
Usage of terms.
Early recorded use.
The town of "Chicana" was shown on the Gutiérrez 1562 New World map near the mouth of the Colorado River, and is probably pre-Columbian in origin. The town was again included on , a 1566 French map by Paolo Forlani. Roberto Cintli Rodríguez places the location of "Chicana" at the mouth of the Colorado River, near present-day Yuma, Arizona. An 18th century map of the Nayarit Missions used the name "Xicana" for a town near the same location of "Chicana", which is considered to be the oldest recorded usage of that term.
A gunboat, the "Chicana", was sold in 1857 to Jose Maria Carvajal to ship arms on the Rio Grande. The King and Kenedy firm submitted a voucher to the Joint Claims Commission of the United States in 1870 to cover the costs of this gunboat's conversion from a passenger steamer. No explanation for the boat's name is known.
The Chicano poet and writer Tino Villanueva traced the first documented use of the term as an ethnonym to 1911, as referenced in a then-unpublished essay by University of Texas anthropologist José Limón. Linguists Edward R. Simmen and Richard F. Bauerle report the use of the term in an essay by Mexican-American writer, Mario Suárez, published in the "Arizona Quarterly" in 1947. There is ample literary evidence to substantiate that "Chicano" is a long-standing endonym, as a large body of Chicano literature pre-dates the 1950s.
Reclaiming the term.
In the 1940s, "Chicano" was reclaimed by Pachuco youth as an expression of defiance to Anglo-American society. At the time, "Chicano" was used among English and Spanish speakers as a classist and racist slur to refer to working class Mexican Americans in Spanish-speaking neighborhoods. In Mexico, the term was used with "Pocho" "to deride Mexicans living in the United States, and especially their U.S.-born children, for losing their culture, customs, and language." Mexican anthropologist Manuel Gamio reported in 1930 that "Chicamo" (with an "m") was used as a derogatory term by Hispanic Texans for recently arrived Mexican immigrants displaced during the Mexican Revolution in the beginning of the early 20th century.
By the 1950s, "Chicano" referred to those who resisted total assimilation, while "Pocho" referred (often pejoratively) to those who strongly advocated for assimilation. In his essay "Chicanismo" in "The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Cultures" (2002), José Cuéllar, dates the transition from derisive to positive to the late 1950s, with increasing use by young Mexican-American high school students. These younger, politically aware Mexican Americans adopted the term "as an act of political defiance and ethnic pride", similar to the reclaiming of "Black" by African Americans. The Chicano Movement during the 1960s and early 1970s played a significant role in reclaiming "Chicano," challenging those who used it as a term of derision on both sides of the Mexico-U.S. border.
Demographic differences in the adoption of "Chicano" occurred at first. It was more likely to be used by males than females, and less likely to be used among those of higher socioeconomic status. Usage was also generational, with third-generation men more likely to use the word. This group was also younger, more political, and different from traditional Mexican cultural heritage. "Chicana" was a similar classist term to refer to "[a] marginalized, brown woman who is treated as a foreigner and is expected to do menial labor and ask nothing of the society in which she lives." Among Mexican Americans, "Chicano" and "Chicana" began to be viewed as a positive identity of self-determination and political solidarity. In Mexico, "Chicano" may still be associated with a Mexican American person of low importance, class, and poor morals (similar to the terms "Cholo", "Chulo" and "Majo"), indicating a difference in cultural views.
Chicano Movement.
"Chicano" was widely reclaimed in the 1960s and 1970s during the Chicano Movement to assert a distinct ethnic, political, and cultural identity that resisted assimilation into whiteness, systematic racism and stereotypes, colonialism, and the American nation-state. Chicano identity formed around seven themes: unity, economy, education, institutions, self-defense, culture, and political liberation, in an effort to bridge regional and class divisions. The notion of Aztlán, a mythical homeland claimed to be located in the southwestern United States, mobilized Mexican Americans to take social and political action. "Chicano" became a unifying term for "mestizos". "Xicano" was also used in the 1970s.
In the 1970s, Chicanos developed a reverence for machismo while also maintaining the values of their original platform. For instance, Oscar Zeta Acosta defined machismo as the source of Chicano identity, claiming that this "instinctual and mystical source of manhood, honor and pride... alone justifies all behavior." Armando Rendón wrote in "Chicano Manifesto" (1971) that machismo was "in fact an underlying drive of the gathering identification of Mexican Americans... the essence of "machismo", of being "macho", is as much a symbolic principle for the Chicano revolt as it is a guideline for family life."
