Title: Shit
Shit is an English-language profanity. As a noun, it refers to fecal matter, and as a verb it means to defecate; in the plural ("the shits"), it means diarrhea. Shite is a common variant in British and Irish English. As a slang term, "shit" has many meanings, including: nonsense, foolishness, something of little value or quality, trivial and usually boastful or inaccurate talk or a contemptible person. It could also be used to refer to any other noun in general or as an expression of annoyance, surprise or anger.
Etymology.
The word is likely derived from Old English, having the nouns "scite" (dung, attested only in place names) and "scitte" (diarrhoea) and the verb "scītan" (to defecate, attested only in "bescītan", to cover with excrement); eventually it morphed into Middle English "schītte" (excrement), "schyt" (diarrhoea) and "shiten" (to defecate), and it is virtually certain that it was used in some form by preliterate Germanic tribes at the time of the Roman Empire. The word may be further traced to Proto-Germanic *"skit"-, and ultimately to Proto-Indo-European *"skheid"- "cut, separate", the same root believed to have become the word "shed". The word has several cognates in modern Germanic languages, such as German "Scheiße", Dutch "schijt", Swedish "skit", Icelandic "skítur", Norwegian "skitt" etc. Ancient Greek had 'skōr' (gen. 'skatos' hence 'scato-'), from Proto-Indo-European *"sker"-, which is likely unrelated.
Usage.
The word "shit" (also "shite" in British and Hiberno-English) is considered profanity and is usually avoided in formal speech. Minced oath substitutes for the word "shit" in English include "shoot", "shucks", "sugar", and the euphemistic backronym, "Sugar, Honey, Ice(d) Tea".
In the word's literal sense, it has a rather small range of common usages. An unspecified or collective occurrence of feces is generally "shit" or "some shit"; a single deposit of feces is sometimes "a shit" or "a piece of shit"; and to defecate is "to shit" or "to take a shit". While it is common to speak of shit as existing in "a pile", "a load", "a hunk", and other quantities and configurations, such expressions flourish most strongly in the figurative.
When uttered as an exclamation or interjection, "shit" may convey astonishment or a feeling of being favorably impressed or disgusted. Similar utterances might be "damn!", "wow!" or "yuck!".
"Piece of shit" may also be used figuratively to describe a particularly loathsome individual, or an object that is of poor quality ("this car is a "piece of shit"", often abbreviated to "P.O.S.").
One study published in 2017 argued that "shit studies" is a cross-disciplinary meta-field of rhetorical inquiry about human communication and reasoning. The authors explained, "rhetorical studies has theorized 'shit' in terms of the communication of transformation, style, and textual relations," particularly in relation to claims of expertise to topics such as "anti-semitism" and "wine-tasting." They conclude that bullshit speech is one-sided discourse that is difficult to penetrate because it contains "ideological barriers to the expectation of mutuality," working to deflect critical responses.
Vague noun.
"Shit" can be used as a generic mass noun similar to "stuff"; for instance, "This show is funny (as) shit" or "This test is hard (as) shit", or "That was stupid shit". These three usages (with "funny", "hard", and "stupid" or another synonym of "stupid") are heard most commonly in the United States. Using "as" denotes a subtle change in the meaning of the expression; however, the overall intent is basically the same.
In the expression "Get your shit together!" the word "shit" can refer either to one's wits or composure or to one's things, gear, etc. "He doesn't have his shit together" means that his affairs are disordered, reflecting not bad luck or forces beyond his control, but his personal shortcomings.
To "shoot the shit" is to have a friendly but pointless conversation, as in "Come by my place some time and we'll shoot the shit."
A "shithole" is any unpleasant place to be, much like a hellhole. This usage originates from a reference to a pit toilet.
A "crock of shit" is something (a situation, explanation, argument, etc.) that is nonsense or fabricated as a deception or evasion; i.e. bullshit. Often abbreviated simply as "crock". Example: "You expect me to believe that ?? What a crock!"
The phrase "built like a brick shithouse" is used in the United States to compliment a curvaceous woman, but in other English-speaking countries to compliment men with athletic physiques. This meaning originates from the observation that most shithouses are rather ramshackle affairs constructed of plywood or scrap sheets of steel.
"The shitter" is a slang term for a toilet, and can be used like the phrase "...down the toilet" to suggest that something has been wasted. Example: "This CD player quit working one friggin' week after I bought it, and I lost the receipt! Twenty bucks right down the shitter!"
"Shit on a shingle" is U.S. military slang for creamed chipped beef on toast. In polite company this can be abbreviated as "SOS".
Trouble.
