Title: State Street Corporation
State Street Corporation (stylized in all caps), is a global financial services and bank holding company headquartered at One Congress Street in Boston with operations worldwide. It is the second-oldest continually operating United States bank; its predecessor, Union Bank, was founded in 1792. State Street is ranked 14th on the list of largest banks in the United States by assets. It is one of the largest asset management companies in the world with US$3.7 trillion under management and US$40.0 trillion under custody and administration in 2023. It is the largest custodian bank in the world, providing securities services and it is considered a systemically important bank by the Financial Stability Board. Along with BlackRock and Vanguard, State Street is considered to be one of the Big Three index fund managers that dominate corporate America.
The company is ranked 316th on the "Fortune" 500 as of 2022. The company is on the list of the banks that are too big to fail published by the Financial Stability Board. It is rated by Visual Capitalist as the third U.S. bank by uninsured deposits, with 91.2% of deposits being uninsured.
The company is named after State Street in Boston, which was known as the "Great Street to the Sea" in the 18th century as Boston became a flourishing maritime capital. The company's logo formerly included a clipper ship to reflect the maritime industry in Boston during this time.
Current operations.
Investment servicing: State Street Global Services.
State Street Bank and Trust Company, also known as Global Services, is the securities services division of State Street that provides asset owners and managers with securities services (e.g. custody, corporate actions), fund accounting (pricing and valuation), and administration (financial reporting, tax, compliance, and legal) services. Global Services handles assets from many classes, including stocks, derivatives, exchange-traded funds, fixed income assets, private equity, and real estate. Global Services also provides outsourcing for operations activities and handles US$10.2 trillion of middle-office assets.
Investment Management: State Street Global Advisors.
State Street Global Advisors is the investment management division of State Street that provides asset management, research, and advisory services to corporations, mutual funds, insurance companies, and other institutional investors. Global Advisors develops both passive management and active management strategies using both quantitative and fundamental approaches.
1993 SPDR innovation.
In 1993, the company created the SPDR S&amp;P 500 Trust ETF, the first exchange-traded fund (ETF), and is now one of the largest ETF providers worldwide.
Trading on SPDR began January 29, 1993.
State Street Global Markets.
Global Markets is State Street's securities business that offers research, trading, and securities lending services for foreign exchange, equities, fixed income, and derivatives. To avoid a conflict of interest, the company does not run proprietary trading books. Global Markets maintains trading desks in Boston, Hong Kong, London, Singapore, Sydney, Toronto, Tokyo and São Paulo .
History.
The company traces its roots to Union Bank, which received a charter in 1792 from Massachusetts Governor John Hancock. It was the third bank to be chartered in Boston and its office was at the corner of State and Exchange Streets. In 1865, Union Bank received a national charter and became the National Union Bank of Boston. The bank later built a headquarters at Washington and State streets.
State Street Deposit &amp; Trust Co opened in July 1891. The name was shortened to State Street Trust Company in 1897. It became the custodian of the first U.S. mutual fund in 1924, the Massachusetts Investors Trust (now MFS Investment Management).
20th century.
State Street and National Union merged in October 1925. The merged bank took the State Street name, but National Union was the nominal survivor, and it operated under National Union's charter, thus giving the current entity its rank among the oldest banks in the United States.
The company merged with Second National Bank in 1955 and with the Rockland-Atlas National Bank in 1961.
