Title: Sake
Sake or , also referred to as Japanese rice wine, is an alcoholic beverage of Japanese origin made by fermenting rice that has been polished to remove the bran. Despite the name "Japanese rice wine", sake, and indeed any East Asian rice wine (such as huangjiu and cheongju), is produced by a brewing process more akin to that of beer, where starch is converted into sugars that ferment into alcohol, whereas in wine, alcohol is produced by fermenting sugar that is naturally present in fruit, typically grapes.
The brewing process for sake differs from the process for beer, where the conversion from starch to sugar and then from sugar to alcohol occurs in two distinct steps. Like other rice wines, when sake is brewed, these conversions occur simultaneously. The alcohol content differs between sake, wine, and beer; while most beer contains 3–9% ABV, wine generally contains 9–16% ABV, and undiluted sake contains 18–20% ABV (although this is often lowered to about 15% by diluting with water before bottling).
In Japanese, the character (kanji: 酒, ) can refer to any alcoholic drink, while the beverage called sake in English is usually termed ' (; meaning 'Japanese alcoholic drink'). Under Japanese liquor laws, sake is labeled with the word ' (; 'refined alcohol'), a synonym not commonly used in conversation.
In Japan, where it is the national beverage, sake is often served with special ceremony, where it is gently warmed in a small earthenware or porcelain bottle and sipped from a small porcelain cup called a "sakazuki". As with wine, the recommended serving temperature of sake varies greatly by type.
Sake now enjoys an international reputation. Of the more than 800 "junmai ginjō-shu" evaluated by Robert Parker's team, 78 received a score of 90 or more ("eRobertParker", 2016).
History.
Until the Kamakura period.
The origin of sake is unclear; however, the method of fermenting rice into alcohol spread to Japan from China around 500BCE. The earliest reference to the use of alcohol in Japan is recorded in the "Book of Wei" in the "Records of the Three Kingdoms". This 3rd-century Chinese text speaks of Japanese drinking and dancing.
 are mentioned several times in the , Japan's first written history, which was compiled in 712. Bamforth (2005) places the probable origin of true sake (which is made from rice, water, and mold (, "Aspergillus oryzae")) in the Nara period (710–794). The fermented food fungi traditionally used for making alcoholic beverages in China and Korea for a long time were fungi belonging to "Rhizopus" and "Mucor", whereas in Japan, except in the early days, the fermented food fungus used for sake brewing was "Aspergillus oryzae". Some scholars believe the Japanese domesticated the mutated, detoxified "Aspergillus flavus" to give rise to "Aspergillus oryzae".
In the Heian period (794–1185), sake was used for religious ceremonies, court festivals, and drinking games. Sake production was a government monopoly for a long time, but in the 10th century, Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines began to brew sake, and they became the main centers of production for the next 500 years.
Muromachi period.
Before the 1440s in the Muromachi period (1333－1573), the Buddhist temple Shōryaku-ji invented various innovative methods for making sake. Because these production methods are the origin of the basic production methods for sake brewing today, Shoryakuji is often said to be the birthplace of (). Until then, most sake had been with a different process from today's, but after that, clear was established. The main production methods established by Shōryaku-ji are the use of all polished rice ("morohaku zukuri", 諸白造り), three-stage fermentation ("sandan zikomi", 三段仕込み), brewing of starter mash using acidic water produced by lactic acid fermentation ("bodaimoto zukuri", 菩提酛づくり), and pasteurization ("hiire", 火入れ). This method of producing starter mash is called "bodaimoto", which is the origin of . These innovations made it possible to produce sake with more stable quality than before, even in temperate regions. These things are described in (), the oldest known technical book on sake brewing written in 1355 or 1489, and (), a diary written between 1478 and 1618 by monks of Kōfuku-ji Temple in the Muromachi period.
A huge tub () with a capacity of 10 "koku" (1,800 liters) was invented at the end of the Muromachi period, making it possible to mass-produce sake more efficiently than before. Until then, sake had been made in jars with a capacity of 1, 2, or 3 "koku" at the most, and some sake brewers used to make sake by arranging 100 jars.
In the 16th century, the technique of distillation was introduced into the Kyushu district from Ryukyu. The brewing of shōchū, called "Imo–sake" started and was sold at the central market in Kyoto.
Edo period.
By the Genroku era (1688–1704) of the Edo period (1603–1867), a brewing method called () was developed in which a small amount of distilled alcohol (shōchū) was added to the mash to make it more aromatic and lighter in taste, while at the same preventing deterioration in quality. This originates from the distilled alcohol addition used in modern sake brewing.
The Nada-Gogō area in Hyōgo Prefecture, the largest producer of modern sake, was formed during this period. When the population of Edo, modern-day Tokyo, began to grow rapidly in the early 1600s, brewers who made sake in inland areas such as Fushimi, Itami, and Ikeda moved to the Nada-Gogō area on the coast, where the weather and water quality were perfect for brewing sake and convenient for shipping it to Edo. In the Genroku era, when the culture of the "chōnin" class, the common people, prospered, the consumption of sake increased rapidly, and large quantities of "taruzake" (樽酒) were shipped to Edo. 80% of the sake drunk in Edo during this period was from Nada-Gogō. Many of today's major sake producers, including Hakutsuru (), Ōzeki (), Niihonsakari (), Kikumasamune (), Kenbishi () and Sawanotsuru, are breweries in Nada-Gogō.
During this period, frequent natural disasters and bad weather caused rice shortages, and the Tokugawa shogunate issued sake brewing restrictions 61 times. In the early Edo period, there was a sake brewing technique called () that was optimized for each season. In 1667, the technique of () for making sake in winter was improved, and in 1673, when the Tokugawa shogunate banned brewing other than "kanzukuri" because of a shortage of rice, the technique of sake brewing in the four seasons ceased, and it became common to make sake only in winter until industrial technology began to develop in the 20th century. During this period, aged for three, five, or nine years, () was a luxury, but its deliciousness was known to the common people.
In the 18th century, Engelbert Kaempfer and Isaac Titsingh published accounts identifying sake as a popular alcoholic beverage in Japan, but Titsingh was the first to try to explain and describe the process of sake brewing. The work of both writers was widely disseminated throughout Europe at the beginning of the 19th century.
