Title: Demeter
In ancient Greek religion and mythology, Demeter (; Attic: "Dēmḗtēr" ; Doric: "Dāmā́tēr") is the Olympian goddess of the harvest and agriculture, presiding over crops, grains, food, and the fertility of the earth. Although she is mostly known as a grain goddess, she also appeared as a goddess of health, birth, and marriage, and had connections to the Underworld. She is also called Deo ( "Dēṓ"). In Greek tradition, Demeter is the second child of the Titans Rhea and Cronus, and sister to Hestia, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus. Like her other siblings but Zeus, she was swallowed by her father as an infant and rescued by Zeus.
Through her brother Zeus, she became the mother of Persephone, a fertility goddess. One of the most notable Homeric Hymns, the "Homeric Hymn to Demeter", tells the story of Persephone's abduction by Hades and Demeter's search for her. When Hades, the King of the Underworld, wished to make Persephone his wife, he abducted her from a field while she was picking flowers, with Zeus' leave. Demeter searched everywhere to find her missing daughter to no avail until she was informed that Hades had taken her to the Underworld. In response, Demeter neglected her duties as goddess of agriculture, plunging the earth into a deadly famine where nothing would grow, causing mortals to die. Zeus ordered Hades to return Persephone to her mother to avert the disaster. However, because Persephone had eaten food from the Underworld, she could not stay with Demeter forever but had to divide the year between her mother and her husband, explaining the seasonal cycle, as Demeter does not let plants grow while Persephone is gone.
Her cult titles include Sito (), "she of the Grain", as the giver of food or grain, and Thesmophoros (, "thesmos": divine order, unwritten law; , "phoros": bringer, bearer), "giver of customs" or "legislator", in association with the secret female-only festival called the Thesmophoria. Though Demeter is often described simply as the goddess of the harvest, she presided also over the sacred law, and the cycle of life and death. She and her daughter Persephone were the central figures of the Eleusinian Mysteries, a religious tradition that predated the Olympian pantheon and which may have its roots in the Mycenaean period –1200 BC.
Demeter was often considered to be the same figure as the Anatolian goddess Cybele, and she was identified with the Roman goddess Ceres.
Etymology.
Demeter may appear in Linear A as "da-ma-te" on three documents (AR Zf 1 and 2, and KY Za 2), all three dedicated to religious situations and all three bearing just the name ("i-da-ma-te" on AR Zf 1 and 2). It is unlikely that Demeter appears as "da-ma-te" in a Linear B (Mycenean Greek) inscription (PY En 609); the word , "da-ma-te", probably refers to "households". On the other hand, , "si-to-po-ti-ni-ja", "Potnia of the Grain", is regarded as referring to her Bronze Age predecessor or to one of her epithets.
Demeter's character as mother-goddess is identified in the second element of her name "meter" () derived from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) "*méh₂tēr" (mother). In antiquity, different explanations were already proffered for the first element of her name. It is possible that "Da" (), a word which corresponds to "Gē" () in Attic, is the Doric form of "De" (), "earth", the old name of the chthonic earth-goddess, and that Demeter is "Mother-Earth". Liddell &amp; Scott find this "improbable" and Beekes writes, "there is no indication that ["da"] means "earth", although it has also been assumed in the name of Poseidon found in the Linear B inscription "E-ne-si-da-o-ne", "earth-shaker". John Chadwick also argues that the "dā" element in the name of Demeter is not so simply equated with "earth".
M. L. West has proposed that the word Demeter, initially "Damater", could be a borrowing from an Illyrian deity attested in the Messapic goddess "Damatura", with a form "dā-" ("earth", from PIE "*dʰǵʰ(e)m-") attached to -"matura" ("mother"), akin to the Illyrian god Dei-paturos ("dei-", "sky", attached to -"paturos," "father"). The Lesbian form "Dō-" may simply reflect a different colloquial pronunciation of the non-Greek name.
Another theory suggests that the element "De"- might be connected with "Deo", an epithet of Demeter and it could derive from the Cretan word "dea" (), Ionic "zeia" ()—variously identified with emmer, spelt, rye, or other grains by modern scholars—so that she is the mother and the giver of food generally. This view is shared by British scholar Jane Ellen Harrison, who suggests that Démeter's name means "Grain-Mother", instead of "Earth-Mother". R. S. P. Beekes rejects a Greek interpretation, but not necessarily an Indo-European one.
Wanax ("wa-na-ka") was her male companion (Greek: Πάρεδρος, "Paredros") in Mycenaean cult. The Arcadian cult links her to the god Poseidon, who probably substituted the male companion of the Great Goddess; Demeter may therefore be related to a Minoan Great Goddess (Cybele).
An alternative Proto-Indo-European etymology comes through Potnia and Despoina, where "Des-" represents a derivative of PIE "*dem" (house, dome), and Demeter is "mother of the house" (from PIE "*dems-méh₂tēr").
Iconography.
Demeter was frequently associated with images of the harvest, including flowers, fruit, and grain. She was also sometimes pictured with her daughter Persephone. However, Demeter is not generally portrayed with any of her consorts; the exception is Iasion, the youth of Crete who lay with her in a thrice-ploughed field and was killed afterward by a jealous Zeus with a thunderbolt.
Demeter is assigned the zodiac constellation Virgo, the Virgin, by Marcus Manilius in his 1st-century Roman work Astronomicon. In art, the constellation Virgo holds Spica, a sheaf of wheat in her hand and sits beside constellation Leo the Lion.
In Arcadia, she was known as "Black Demeter". She was said to have taken the form of a mare to escape the pursuit of her younger brother, Poseidon, and having been raped by him despite her disguise, she dressed all in black and retreated into a cave to mourn and to purify herself. She was consequently depicted with the head of a horse in this region.
A sculpture of the Black Demeter was made by Onatas.
Description.
In the earliest conceptions of Demeter she is the goddess of grain and threshing, however her functions were extended beyond the fields and she was often identified with the earth goddess (Gaia). Some of the epithets of Gaia and Demeter are similar showing the identity of their nature. In most of her myths and cults, Demeter is the "Grain-Mother" or the "Earth-Mother". In the older chthonic cults the earth goddess was related to the Underworld and in the secret rites (mysteries) Demeter and Persephone share the double function of death and fertility. Demeter is the giver of the secret rites and the giver of the laws of cereal agriculture. She was occasionally identified with the "Great Mother" Rhea-Cybele who was worshipped in Crete and Asia Minor with the music of cymbals and violent rites. It seems that poppies were connected with the cult of the Great Mother.
As an agricultural goddess.
