Title: Computable number
In mathematics, computable numbers are the real numbers that can be computed to within any desired precision by a finite, terminating algorithm. They are also known as the recursive numbers, effective numbers or the computable reals or recursive reals. The concept of a computable real number was introduced by Emile Borel in 1912, using the intuitive notion of computability available at the time.
Equivalent definitions can be given using μ-recursive functions, Turing machines, or λ-calculus as the formal representation of algorithms. The computable numbers form a real closed field and can be used in the place of real numbers for many, but not all, mathematical purposes.
Informal definition using a Turing machine as example.
In the following, Marvin Minsky defines the numbers to be computed in a manner similar to those defined by Alan Turing in 1936; i.e., as "sequences of digits interpreted as decimal fractions" between 0 and 1:
The key notions in the definition are (1) that some "n" is specified at the start, (2) for any "n" the computation only takes a finite number of steps, after which the machine produces the desired output and terminates.
An alternate form of (2) – the machine successively prints all "n" of the digits on its tape, halting after printing the "n"th – emphasizes Minsky's observation: (3) That by use of a Turing machine, a "finite" definition – in the form of the machine's state table – is being used to define what is a potentially "infinite" string of decimal digits.
This is however not the modern definition which only requires the result be accurate to within any given accuracy. The informal definition above is subject to a rounding problem called the table-maker's dilemma whereas the modern definition is not.
Formal definition.
A real number "a" is computable if it can be approximated by some computable function formula_1 in the following manner: given any positive integer "n", the function produces an integer "f"("n") such that:
There are two similar definitions that are equivalent:
There is another equivalent definition of computable numbers via computable Dedekind cuts. A computable Dedekind cut is a computable function formula_8 which when provided with a rational number formula_9 as input returns formula_10 or formula_11, satisfying the following conditions:
An example is given by a program "D" that defines the cube root of 3. Assuming formula_15 this is defined by:
A real number is computable if and only if there is a computable Dedekind cut "D" corresponding to it. The function "D" is unique for each computable number (although of course two different programs may provide the same function).
A complex number is called computable if its real and imaginary parts are computable.
Properties.
Not computably enumerable.
Assigning a Gödel number to each Turing machine definition produces a subset formula_18 of the natural numbers corresponding to the computable numbers and identifies a surjection from formula_18 to the computable numbers. There are only countably many Turing machines, showing that the computable numbers are subcountable. The set formula_18 of these Gödel numbers, however, is not computably enumerable (and consequently, neither are subsets of formula_18 that are defined in terms of it). This is because there is no algorithm to determine which Gödel numbers correspond to Turing machines that produce computable reals. In order to produce a computable real, a Turing machine must compute a total function, but the corresponding decision problem is in Turing degree 0′′. Consequently, there is no surjective computable function from the natural numbers to the set formula_18 of machines representing computable reals, and Cantor's diagonal argument cannot be used constructively to demonstrate uncountably many of them.
While the set of real numbers is uncountable, the set of computable numbers is classically countable and thus almost all real numbers are not computable. Here, for any given computable number formula_23 the well ordering principle provides that there is a minimal element in formula_18 which corresponds to formula_25, and therefore there exists a subset consisting of the minimal elements, on which the map is a bijection. The inverse of this bijection is an injection into the natural numbers of the computable numbers, proving that they are countable. But, again, this subset is not computable, even though the computable reals are themselves ordered.
Properties as a field.
