Title: The New York Times
The New York Times (often abbreviated to The Times or NYT) is an American daily newspaper based in New York City. "The New York Times" covers domestic, national, and international news, and comprises opinion pieces, investigative reports, and reviews. As one of the longest-running newspapers in the United States, it serves as one of the country's main newspapers of record. , it has a readership of 9.7 million digital-only subscribers and 660,000 print subscribers, making it the second-largest newspaper in the country by print circulation, and 17th in the world by circulation. "The New York Times" has received 137 Pulitzer Prizes as of 2023, the most of any publication, among other accolades. "The New York Times" is published by the The New York Times Company; since 1896, the company has been chaired by the Ochs-Sulzberger family, including its current chairman and the paper's publisher, A. G. Sulzberger. The "Times" is headquartered at The New York Times Building in Manhattan.
The "Times" was founded as the conservative "New-York Daily Times" in 1851, and came to national recognition in the 1870s with its aggressive coverage of corrupt politician William M. Tweed. Following the Panic of 1893, "Chattanooga Times" publisher Adolph Ochs gained a controlling interest in the company. In 1935, Ochs was succeeded by his son-in-law, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, who began a push into European news. Sulzberger's son-in-law Arthur Ochs became publisher in 1963, adapting to a changing newspaper industry and introducing radical changes. "The New York Times" was involved in the landmark 1964 Supreme Court case "New York Times Co. v. Sullivan", which restricted the ability of public officials to sue the media for defamation.
In 1971, "The New York Times" published the "Pentagon Papers", an internal Department of Defense document detailing the United States's historical involvement in the Vietnam War, despite pushback from then-president Richard Nixon. In the landmark decision "New York Times Co. v. United States" (1971), the Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment guaranteed the right to publish the "Pentagon Papers". In the 1980s, the "Times" began a two-decade progression to digital technology and launched nytimes.com in 1996. In the 21st century, "The New York Times" has shifted online amid the decline of newspapers.
The "Times" has expanded to several other publications, including "The New York Times Magazine", "The New York Times International Edition", "The New York Times Book Review". In addition, the paper has produced several television series, podcasts—including "The Daily"—and games. "The New York Times" has been involved in several controversies in its history.
Organization.
Management.
Since 1896, "The New York Times" has been published by the Ochs-Sulzberger family, having previously been published by Henry Jarvis Raymond until 1869 and by George Jones until 1896. Adolph Ochs published the "Times" until his death in 1935, when he was succeeded by his son-in-law, Arthur Hays Sulzberger. Sulzberger was publisher until 1961 and was succeeded by Orvil Dryfoos, his son-in-law, who served in the position until his death in 1963. Arthur Ochs Sulzberger succeeded Dryfoos until his resignation in 1992. His son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr., served as publisher until 2018. "The New York Times"s current publisher is A. G. Sulzberger, Sulzberger Jr.'s son. As of 2023, the "Times"s executive editor is Joseph Kahn and the paper's managing editors are Marc Lacey and Carolyn Ryan, having been appointed in June 2022. "The New York Times"s deputy managing editors are Sam Dolnick, Monica Drake, and Steve Duenes, and the paper's assistant managing editors are Matthew Ericson, Jonathan Galinsky, Hannah Poferl, Sam Sifton, Karron Skog, and Michael Slackman.
"The New York Times" is owned by The New York Times Company, a publicly traded company. The New York Times Company, in addition to the "Times", owns "Wirecutter", "The Athletic", The New York Times Cooking, and The New York Times Games, and acquired Serial Productions and Audm. The New York Times Company holds undisclosed minority investments in multiple other businesses, and formerly owned "The Boston Globe" and several radio and television stations. The New York Times Company is majority-owned by the Ochs-Sulzberger family through elevated shares in the company's dual-class stock structure held largely in a trust, in effect since the 1950s; as of 2022, the family holds ninety-five percent of The New York Times Company's Class B shares, allowing it to elect seventy percent of the company's board of directors. Class A shareholders have restrictive voting rights. As of 2023, The New York Times Company's chief executive is Meredith Kopit Levien, the company's former chief operating officer who was appointed in September 2020.
Journalists.
As of March 2023, The New York Times Company employs 5,800 individuals, including 1,700 journalists according to deputy managing editor Sam Dolnick. Journalists for "The New York Times" may not run for public office, provide financial support to political candidates or causes, endorse candidates, or demonstrate public support for causes or movements. Journalists are subject to the guidelines established in "Ethical Journalism" and "Guidelines on Integrity". According to the former, "Times" journalists must abstain from using sources with a personal relationship to them and must not accept reimbursements or inducements from individuals who may be written about in "The New York Times", with exceptions for gifts of nominal value. The latter requires attribution and exact quotations, though exceptions are made for linguistic anomalies. Staff writers are expected to ensure the veracity of all written claims, but may delegate researching obscure facts to the research desk. In March 2021, the "Times" established a committee to avoid journalistic conflicts of interest with work written for "The New York Times", following columnist David Brooks's resignation from the Aspen Institute for his undisclosed work on the initiative Weave.
Editorial board.
"The New York Times" editorial board was established in 1896 by Adolph Ochs. With the opinion department, the editorial board is independent of the newsroom. Then-editor-in-chief Charles Ransom Miller served as opinion editor from 1883 until his death in 1922. Rollo Ogden succeeded Miller until his death in 1937. From 1937 to 1938, John Huston Finley served as opinion editor; in a prearranged plan, Charles Merz succeeded Finley. Merz served in the position until his retirement in 1961. John Bertram Oakes served as opinion editor from 1961 to 1976, when then-publisher Arthur Ochs Sulzberger appointed Max Frankel. Frankel served in the position until 1986, when he was appointed as executive editor. Jack Rosenthal was the opinion editor from 1986 to 1993. Howell Raines succeeded Rosenthal until 2001, when he was made executive editor. Gail Collins succeeded Raines until her resignation in 2006. From 2007 to 2016, Andrew Rosenthal was the opinion editor. James Bennet succeeded Rosenthal until his resignation in 2020. As of 2023, the editorial board comprises fourteen opinion writers. "The New York Times"s opinion editor is Kathleen Kingsbury and the deputy opinion editor is Patrick Healy.
"The New York Times"s editorial board was initially opposed to liberal beliefs, opposing women's suffrage in 1900 and 1914. The editorial board began to espouse progressive beliefs during Oakes' tenure, conflicting with the Ochs-Sulzberger family, of which Oakes was a member as Adolph Ochs's nephew; in 1976, Oakes publicly disavowed with Sulzberger's endorsement of Daniel Patrick Moynihan over Bella Abzug in the 1976 Senate Democratic primaries in a letter sent from Martha's Vineyard. Under Rosenthal, the editorial board took positions supporting assault weapons legislation and the legalization of marijuana, but publicly criticized the Obama administration over its portrayal of terrorism. Since 1960, "The New York Times" has endorsed Democratic candidates, supporting a total of twelve Republican candidates and thirty Democratic candidates. With the exception of Wendell Willkie, the "Times"s Republican presidential endorsements have won the general election. In 2016, the editorial board issued an anti-endorsement against Donald Trump for the first time in its history.
Unionization.
Since 1940, editorial, media, and technology workers of "The New York Times" have been represented by the New York Times Guild. The Times Guild, along with the Times Tech Guild, are represented by the NewsGuild-CWA. In 1940, Arthur Hays Sulzberger was called upon by the National Labor Relations Board amid accusations that he had discouraged Guild membership in the "Times". Over the next few years, the Guild would ratify several contracts, expanding to editorial and news staff in 1942 and maintenance workers in 1943. The New York Times Guild has walked out several times in its history, including for six and a half hours in 1981 and in 2017, when copy editors and reporters walked out at lunchtime in response to the elimination of the copy desk. On December 7, 2022, the union held a one-day strike, the first interruption to "The New York Times" since 1978. The New York Times Guild reached an agreement in May 2023 to increase minimum salaries for employees and a retroactive bonus. The Times Tech Guild is the largest technology union with collective bargaining rights in the United States.
Content.
Circulation.
As of February 2024, "The New York Times" has 10.36 million subscribers, with 9.7 million online subscribers and 660,000 print subscribers, the second-largest newspaper by print circulation in the United States behind "The Wall Street Journal". The New York Times Company intends to have fifteen million subscribers by 2027. The "Times"s shift towards subscription-based revenue with the debut of an online paywall in 2011 contributed to subscription revenue exceeding advertising revenue the following year, furthered by the 2016 presidential election and Donald Trump. In 2022, "Vox" wrote that "The New York Times"s subscribers skew "older, richer, whiter, and more liberal"; to reflect the general population of the United States, the "Times" has attempted to alter its audience by acquiring "The Athletic", investing in verticals such as "The New York Times Games" and The New York Times Games, and beginning a marketing campaign showing diverse subscribers to the "Times". The New York Times Company chief executive Meredith Kopit Levien stated that the average age of subscribers has remained constant.
Newsletters.
