Title: Ninja Tune
Ninja Tune is an English independent record label based in London with a satellite office in Los Angeles. It was founded by Matt Black and Jonathan More (professionally known as Coldcut) and managed by Peter Quicke and others.
Inspired by a visit to Japan, Black, and More created Ninja Tune in 1990 as a means, according to "Billboard" magazine, "to escape the creative control of major labels," and as a vehicle to release music of an underground nature, free from the constraints they experienced in their brief stints with Arista and Big Life. The label has been called "visionary" and "reliably excellent." It has signed a diverse range of artists, has created its own publishing company, Just Isn't Music and finds innovative uses of software.
The label's first releases — the first five volumes of DJ Food's "Jazz Brakes" — were produced by Coldcut in the early 1990s. They were composed of instrumental sample-based cuts that led the duo to help pioneer new instrumental hip hop beats genres (alongside the Mo'Wax label and Ninja Tune artists such as Funki Porcini, The Herbaliser, and DJ Vadim) and, to this day, are recognized as being indispensable tools for DJs.
The label has since released music from many artists (including The Cinematic Orchestra, Amon Tobin, Bonobo, Kelis, BICEP, The Bug, Machinedrum, and Lee Bannon) and distributes for other record labels – including Big Dada, Brainfeeder (Flying Lotus' label) and Technicolour Records.
History.
1990–1999.
Following a Coldcut tour in Japan with Norman Cook, a.k.a. Fatboy Slim, then of Beats International, the label lifted its moniker and aesthetic from the Japanese TV shows of the 1950s and 1960s based on the Ninja. With their first releases in the early 1990s, Ninja Tune went on to, according to Pitchfork, "usher in trip-hop/instrumental hip hop."
After Coldcut's success with their first label, "Ahead of Our Time", contractual issues prevented them from releasing anything under their name. Ninja Tune's inaugural release was Coldcut's (under the name Bogus Order) house break collection "Zen Brakes Vol. 1" in 1990. The label got a bigger name for itself when Coldcut, as DJ Food, released their funky hip-hop jazz-breaks album, "Jazz Brakes Vol. 1", which, according to "Record Collector", "blew up" in the DJ circuit. DJ Food's "Jazz Brakes" series were intended as source material for DJs and producers who worked with breaks and beats.
In 1992, Peter Quicke joined as label manager, as did Patrick Carpenter, a.k.a. PC, who joined Coldcut as a sound engineer. PC would become a crucial member of Ninja Tune and from "Jazz Brakes Vol. 4" onward, an integral part of the DJ Food production team. Steinski, a big inspiration behind Coldcut's initial forays into music, released his first Ninja Tune EP as Steinski and Mass Media in the same year. The single, in the words of Pitchfork, "builds on a catchy loop of the Jackson 5's 'It's Great to Be Here' and creates one of the few anti-Gulf War protest songs of the era, transforming [ U.S. President George H. W. ] Bush's speech into a pop hook ('Regrettably, we now believe/ That only force will make him leave') and interspersing quotes from Jello Biafra ('don't hate the media, become the media!') and Mario Savio's famous 1964 address to the Berkeley Free Speech Movement."
Between 1994 and 1997 Ninja explored and defined the instrumental hip hop beats sound further (often known as trip hop). Its pioneering influence on the genre became more prevalent with the label's first compilation, "Funkjazztical Tricknology", in 1995. The genre originated in England as a successor to acid house, taking in acid jazz and funk, and using hip hop style breakbeats rather than the mechanical '4 on the floor' drum rhythm of the house. Ninja artists especially looked beyond the normal sampling sources of old funk records into jazz, epitomized by Ninja act The Cinematic Orchestra.
Coldcut's contribution to Britain's flourishing scene was solidified by their Solid Steel show on London's Kiss FM, on airwaves since 1988. The ongoing success of Solid Steel, and its subsequent syndication across the globe, broadcast the Ninja brand across the airwaves. The late-night Saturday show cut all manner of beats, samples, and loops into a chaotic musical blend. The show's 'everything but the kitchen sink' approach continued through Coldcut's "utterly brilliant" "Journeys by DJ" series of mix compilations in 1995. The title "70 Minutes of Madness" was a nod to Coldcut's earlier Eric B &amp; Rakim remix, and included sounds from Depth Charge, DJ Food, Plastikman, Mantronix, Harold Budd and the Doctor Who theme.
In 1994, Matt Black's close friend Mixmaster Morris introduced Matt to Openmind – a DJ &amp; design collective in Camberwell – at the Telepathic Fish chill-out club, they were running. Openmind included Kevin Foakes a.k.a. Strictly Kev of DJ Food. After submitting a re-styled company logo he was employed by Ninja Tune in the capacity of overall design consultant. Matt Black also invited Foakes to Ninja's recording studio, where he eventually joined the many hands at work on DJ Food's 1995 album, "Recipe for Disaster" (which also included Patrick Carpenter a.k.a. PC, Isaac Elliston, Paul Rabiger and Paul Brooks). The album was called a "whirlwind of beats put through the blender" and proved a good cross-selection of the group's various styles.
In 1995, The Herbaliser—in what All Music Guide said was one of the more purely hip-hop-oriented acts on Ninja Tune's roster at that point—released their debut album "Remedies". "Remedies" brought both the group and the label much attention.
Also in 1995, an album launch party for DJ Food's "Recipe for Disaster" was the beginning of what would become a regular club night, Stealth. Stealth was named Club of the Year by NME in 1996, with guests including Kruder &amp; Dorfmeister, Squarepusher, Ashley Beedle, James Lavelle, Kid Koala and the label roster. Around the same time, Ninja Tune began organizing its first package tours across the UK and Europe.
With their two 1994 albums, "Paradise Blown" and "Electric Lazyland", 9 Lazy 9 helped spawn the funky, subterranean sound for which Ninja Tune would earn its early acclaim, combining hip hop and funk breakbeats with jazz-influenced sound. Their success inspired one-half of the Italian-based duo, James Braddell, to return to the UK and begin his solo project. As Funki Porcini, Braddell released "Hed Phone Sex" in 1995, which ran through a gamut of genres, from dub to drum and bass. Braddell continued to explore sonic territories on 1996's "Let's See What Carmen Can Do" EP and the "Love, Pussycats and Car Wrecks" album from the same year.
DJ Vadim, a Russian-born turntablist from London who had already released EPs on his own Jazz Fudge label, released his 1996 album "U.S.S.R. Repertoire", which, according to music critic Simon Reynolds, "locked grooves and ultra-vivid, up-close sample-textures." "U.S.S.R. Reconstruction" followed in 1998, a remix album filled with hip hop that The Wire claimed "turns the air into molasses." With "U.S.S.R. Reconstruction", Vadim selected 13 producers, including Reflection, Clatterbox, DJ Krush, Silent Poets, and Kid Koala. All Music Guide remarked on DJ VAdim's "attention to detail when structuring beats," and said that he "created an excellent album his first time out."
Throughout the 1990s, Matt Black began exploring his interests in burgeoning computer and audio/visual technologies, to experiment with the VJ software and hardware that was already changing the Coldcut DJ performances. His Hex collective – also featuring artist Robert Pepperell and programmer Miles Visman – produced video games and multimedia CD-ROMs in the early 1990s, along with subsequent projects that further affirmed Ninja Tune's alliance with A/V disciples. Teaming up with Hexstatic member Stuart Warren-Hill (who also signed to the Ntone label for several audiovisual albums), Coldcut's "Timber" video – an AV collage piece using analogous techniques to audio sample collage – was put on heavy rotation on MTV, and won awards for its innovative use of repetitive video clips synced to the music, including being shortlisted at the Edinburgh Television and Film Festival in their top five music videos of the year in 1998.
In 1995, Matt Black created "Pipe", Ninja's first website. The label's current website is ninja tune. net was developed by the following year.
Also in 1996, Ninja Tune expanded across the ocean, opening its Montreal office to manage distribution across North America. That same year, Ninja Tune cemented its place with the double-disc "Flexistentialism", a compilation that featured the label's growing roster, including DJ Food, Funki Porcini, The Herbaliser, Luke Vibert, Kruder &amp; Dorfmeister and DJ Vadim, among others. With "Flexistentialism", The book "Integrated Performance Management" described Ninja Tunes as devising "a term that perfectly expresses the antitheses between chaos and order."
