Title: Hahn–Banach theorem
The Hahn–Banach theorem is a central tool in functional analysis. 
It allows the extension of bounded linear functionals defined on a vector subspace of some vector space to the whole space, and it also shows that there are "enough" continuous linear functionals defined on every normed vector space to make the study of the dual space "interesting". Another version of the Hahn–Banach theorem is known as the Hahn–Banach separation theorem or the hyperplane separation theorem, and has numerous uses in convex geometry.
History.
The theorem is named for the mathematicians Hans Hahn and Stefan Banach, who proved it independently in the late 1920s. 
The special case of the theorem for the space formula_1 of continuous functions on an interval was proved earlier (in 1912) by Eduard Helly, and a more general extension theorem, the M. Riesz extension theorem, from which the Hahn–Banach theorem can be derived, was proved in 1923 by Marcel Riesz.
The first Hahn–Banach theorem was proved by Eduard Helly in 1912 who showed that certain linear functionals defined on a subspace of a certain type of normed space (formula_2) had an extension of the same norm. Helly did this through the technique of first proving that a one-dimensional extension exists (where the linear functional has its domain extended by one dimension) and then using induction. In 1927, Hahn defined general Banach spaces and used Helly's technique to prove a norm-preserving version of Hahn–Banach theorem for Banach spaces (where a bounded linear functional on a subspace has a bounded linear extension of the same norm to the whole space). In 1929, Banach, who was unaware of Hahn's result, generalized it by replacing the norm-preserving version with the dominated extension version that uses sublinear functions. Whereas Helly's proof used mathematical induction, Hahn and Banach both used transfinite induction.
The Hahn–Banach theorem arose from attempts to solve infinite systems of linear equations. This is needed to solve problems such as the moment problem, whereby given all the potential moments of a function one must determine if a function having these moments exists, and, if so, find it in terms of those moments. Another such problem is the Fourier cosine series problem, whereby given all the potential Fourier cosine coefficients one must determine if a function having those coefficients exists, and, again, find it if so.
Riesz and Helly solved the problem for certain classes of spaces (such as formula_3 and formula_4) where they discovered that the existence of a solution was equivalent to the existence and continuity of certain linear functionals. In effect, they needed to solve the following problem: 
If formula_6 happens to be a reflexive space then to solve the vector problem, it suffices to solve the following dual problem:
Riesz went on to define formula_3 space (formula_20) in 1910 and the formula_21 spaces in 1913. While investigating these spaces he proved a special case of the Hahn–Banach theorem. Helly also proved a special case of the Hahn–Banach theorem in 1912. In 1910, Riesz solved the functional problem for some specific spaces and in 1912, Helly solved it for a more general class of spaces. It wasn't until 1932 that Banach, in one of the first important applications of the Hahn–Banach theorem, solved the general functional problem. The following theorem states the general functional problem and characterizes its solution.
The Hahn–Banach theorem can be deduced from the above theorem. If formula_6 is reflexive then this theorem solves the vector problem.
Hahn–Banach theorem.
A real-valued function formula_23 defined on a subset formula_24 of formula_6 is said to be a function formula_26 if formula_27 for every formula_28 
Hence the reason why the following version of the Hahn–Banach theorem is called . 
The theorem remains true if the requirements on formula_29 are relaxed to require only that formula_29 be a convex function:
formula_31 
A function formula_26 is convex and satisfies formula_33 if and only if formula_34 for all vectors formula_35 and all non-negative real formula_36 such that formula_37 Every sublinear function is a convex function. 
On the other hand, if formula_26 is convex with formula_39 then the function defined by formula_40 is positively homogeneous 
(because for all formula_41 and formula_42 one has formula_43), hence, being convex, it is sublinear. It is also bounded above by formula_44 and satisfies formula_45 for every linear functional formula_46 So the extension of the Hahn–Banach theorem to convex functionals does not have a much larger content than the classical one stated for sublinear functionals.
