Title: Moose
The moose (: 'moose'; used in North America) or elk (: 'elk' or 'elks'; used in Eurasia) (Alces alces) is the world's tallest, largest and heaviest extant species of deer and the only species in the genus Alces. It is also the tallest, and the second-largest, land animal in North America, falling short only of the American bison in body mass. Most adult male moose have broad, palmate ("open-hand shaped") antlers; other members of the deer family have antlers with a dendritic ("twig-like"), pointed configuration. Moose inhabit the circumpolar boreal forests or temperate broadleaf and mixed forests of the Northern Hemisphere, thriving in cooler, temperate areas as well as subarctic climates.
Hunting has shaped the relationship between moose and humans, both in Eurasia and North America; prior to the colonial era (around 1600-1700 CE), moose were one of many valuable sources of sustenance for tribal groups and First Nations. Hunting and habitat loss have reduced the moose's range and led to sightings of "urban moose" in some areas. There have been many reports of moose walking down city streets and of bulls sparring in suburban driveways. Females with young calves have been documented chasing vehicles to 'defend' their young, as well as relaxing in public parks or browsing plants in home gardens.
The moose has been reintroduced to some of its former habitats. Currently, the highest numbers occur in Canada, where they can be found in all provinces (excepting Nunavut and Prince Edward Island); additionally, substantial numbers of moose are found in Alaska, New England (with Maine having the most of the contiguous United States), New York State, Fennoscandia, the Baltic states, the Caucasus region, Belarus, Poland, Eastern Europe, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, and Russia. In the United States (outside of Alaska and New England), most moose are found further to the north, west and northeast (including Colorado, Idaho, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Wisconsin and Wyoming), and they have been documented as far south as western Oklahoma, northeastern Arizona and northwestern New Mexico.
Predominantly a browser, the moose's diet consists of both terrestrial and aquatic vegetation, depending on the season, with branches, twigs and dead wood being a large portion of their winter diet. Predators of moose include wolves, bears, humans, wolverines (rarely, though may take calves), and (rarely, if swimming in the ocean) orcas. Unlike most other deer species, moose do not form herds and are solitary animals, aside from calves who remain with their mother until the cow begins estrus again (typically 18 months after the birth of a calf), at which point the cow chases them away. Although generally slow-moving and sedentary, moose can become defensively aggressive, and move very quickly if angered or startled. Their mating season in the autumn features energetic fights between males competing for a female.
Etymology and naming.
"Alces alces" is called a "moose" in North American English, but an "elk" in British English. The word "elk" in North American English refers to a completely different species of deer, "Cervus canadensis", also called the wapiti. A mature male moose is called a bull, a mature female a cow, and an immature moose of either sex a calf.
According to the "Oxford English Dictionary", the etymology of the species is "of obscure history". In Classical Antiquity, the animal was known as "álkē" in Greek and in Latin, words probably borrowed from a Germanic language or another language of northern Europe. By the 8th century, during the Early Middle Ages, the species was known as derived from the Proto-Germanic: "*elho-", "*elhon-" and possibly connected with the . Later, the species became known in Middle English as "elk", "elcke", or "elke", appearing in the Latinized form "alke", with the spelling "alce" borrowed directly from . Noting that "elk" "is not the normal phonetic representative" of the Old English "elch", the "Oxford English Dictionary" derives "elk" from , itself from .
The word "elk" has cognates in other Indo-European languages, e.g. "elg" in Danish/Norwegian; "älg" in Swedish; "alnis" in Latvian; "eland" in Dutch/Frisian; and "Elch" in German. In the continental European languages, these forms of the word "elk" always refer to "Alces alces".
The youngest elk bones in Great Britain were found in Scotland and are roughly 3,900 years old. The elk was probably extinct on the island before 900 AD. The word "elk" remained in usage because of English-speakers' familiarity with the species in Continental Europe; however, without any living animals around to serve as a reference, the meaning became rather vague, and by the 17th century "elk" had a meaning similar to "large deer". Dictionaries of the 18th century simply described "elk" as a deer that was "as large as a horse".
Confusingly, the word "elk" is used in North America to refer to a different animal, "Cervus canadensis", which is also called by the Algonquian indigenous name, "wapiti". The British began colonizing America in the 17th century, and found two common species of deer for which they had no names. The wapiti appeared very similar to the red deer of Europe (which itself was then almost extinct in Southern Britain) although it was much larger and was not red; the two species are indeed closely related, though distinct behaviorally and genetically. The moose was a rather strange-looking deer to the colonists, and they often adopted local names for both. In the early days of American colonization, the wapiti was often called a gray moose and the moose was often called a black moose, but early accounts of the animals varied wildly, adding to the confusion.
The word "moose" had first entered English by 1606 and is borrowed from the Algonquian languages (compare the Narragansett "moos" and Eastern Abenaki "mos"; according to early sources, these were likely derived from "moosu", meaning "he strips off"), and possibly involved forms from multiple languages mutually reinforcing one another. The Proto-Algonquian form was "*mo·swa".
Early European explorers in North America, particularly in Virginia where there were no moose, called the wapiti "elk" because of its size and resemblance to familiar-looking deer like the red deer. The moose resembled the "German elk" (the moose of continental Europe), which was less familiar to the British colonists. For a long time neither species had an official name, but were called a variety of things. Eventually, in North America the wapiti became known as an elk while the moose retained its indigenous name. In 1736, Samuel Dale wrote to the Royal Society of Great Britain:
The common light-grey moose, called by the Indians, Wampoose, and the large or black-moose, which is the beast whose horns I herewith present. As to the grey moose, I take it to be no larger than what Mr. John Clayton, in his account of the Virginia Quadrupeds, calls the Elke ... was in all respects like those of our red-deer or stags, only larger ... The black moose is (by all that have hitherto writ of it) accounted a very large creature. ... The stag, buck, or male of this kind has a palmed horn, not like that of our common or fallow-deer, but the palm is much longer, and more like that of the "German elke."
Description and anatomy.
Antlers.
Bull moose have antlers like other members of the deer family. The size and growth rate of antlers is determined by diet and age; symmetry reflects health. Size and symmetry in the number of antler points signals bull moose quality; cows may select mates based on antler size and symmetry. Bull moose use dominant displays of antlers to discourage competition and will spar or fight rivals.
The male's antlers grow as cylindrical beams projecting on each side of the head at right angles to the midline of the skull, and then fork. The lower prong of this fork may be either simple, or divided into two or three tines, with some flattening. Most moose have antlers that are broad and palmate (flat) with tines (points) along the outer edge. Within the ecologic range of the moose in Europe, those in northerly locales display the palmate pattern of antlers, while the antlers of European moose over the southerly portion of its range are typically of the cervina dendritic pattern and comparatively small, perhaps due to evolutionary pressures of hunting by humans, who prize the large palmate antlers. European moose with antlers intermediate between the palmate and the dendritic form are found in the middle of the north–south range. Moose with antlers have more acute hearing than those without antlers; a study of trophy antlers using a microphone found that the palmate antler acts as a parabolic reflector, amplifying sound at the moose's ear.
The antlers of mature Alaskan adult bull moose (5 to 12 years old) have a normal maximum spread greater than . By the age of 13, moose antlers decline in size and symmetry. The widest spread recorded was across. An Alaskan moose also holds the record for the heaviest weight at .
Antler beam diameter, not the number of tines, indicates age. In North America, moose ("A. a. americanus") antlers are usually larger than those of Eurasian moose and have two lobes on each side, like a butterfly. Eurasian moose antlers resemble a seashell, with a single lobe on each side. In the North Siberian moose ("A. a. bedfordiae"), the posterior division of the main fork divides into three tines, with no distinct flattening. In the common moose ("A. a. alces") this branch usually expands into a broad palmation, with one large tine at the base and a number of smaller snags on the free border. There is, however, a Scandinavian breed of the common moose in which the antlers are simpler and recall those of the East Siberian animals. The palmation appears to be more marked in North American moose than in the typical Scandinavian moose.
