Title: Plzeň
Plzeň (), also known in English and German as Pilsen (), is a city in the Czech Republic. About west of Prague in western Bohemia, it is the fourth most populous city in the Czech Republic with about 181,000 inhabitants.
Founded as a royal city in the late 13th century, Plzeň became an important town for trade on routes linking Bohemia with Bavaria. By the 14th century it had grown to be the third largest city in Bohemia. The city was besieged three times during the 15th-century Hussite Wars, when it became a centre of resistance against the Hussites. During the Thirty Years War in the early 17th century the city was temporarily occupied after the Siege of Plzeň. 
In the 19th century, the city rapidly industrialised and became home to the Škoda Works, which became one of the most important engineering companies in Austria-Hungary and later in Czechoslovakia. The city is known worldwide as the home of Pilsner beer, created by Bavarian brewer Josef Groll in the city in 1842; today, the Pilsner Urquell Brewery is the largest brewery in the Czech Republic.
Plzeň serves as the main business centre of West Bohemia and the capital of the Plzeň Region. The city is a cultural heritage zone known for its Baroque architecture, and was European Capital of Culture in 2015. Plzeň is home to football club FC Viktoria Plzeň, one of the most successful clubs in the Czech league, and ice hockey club HC Škoda Plzeň.
Administrative division.
Plzeň is divided into ten boroughs, which are further divided into 25 administrative parts (in brackets):
Geography.
Plzeň is located about west of Prague. The city is situated at the confluences of four rivers: Mže, Úhlava, Úslava and Radbuza. From the confluence of the Mže and Radbuza, the river is known as the Berounka. Plzeň lies mostly in the Plasy Uplands, with small parts of the municipal territory extending into the Švihov Highlands to the east and south. The highest point is the hill Chlum at above sea level. The lowest point is the river bed of the Berounka at . The largest body of water is the České údolí Reservoir, built on the Radbuza. A system of ponds is located on the northern edge of the city.
Climate.
Plzeň has a cool and temperate Oceanic climate (Cfb). Plzeň has low rainfall ( year average) evenly spread over the year. Precipitation occurs on average every second day, and the number of days with thunderstorms is 19. It receives on average 1,700 hours of sunshine though winters have longer periods without sunshine. Terrain features and a relatively low altitude () give some shelter from strong winds.
Winters are chilly but milder than some adjacent areas. Snow cover is erratic and lasts on average for 51 days. Though an average year has 113 days with minimum temperature below zero, the temperature falls below on 5 days. The record low temperatures is around . Winters are often murky with frequent long-standing haze. Spring is short, and in April to June there is blooming vegetation. Summer lasts from the end of May until the first third of September. During that period Plzeň has changeable weather which can be warm to hot. Temperatures are always above 5 degrees Celsius with nights between and days between . Days are up to 16 hours long.
Plzeň can be hot, especially during heat waves originating in the southern Mediterranean. The number of hot days above is steadily growing, with 5 months (late April – early September) of possible 30+ °C days. If hot weather does occur, it is often changes after a few weeks into cold and rainy weather with incoming Atlantic-based fronts. Nights can be unpleasantly cold even in summer, with high level of humidity. Winter frosts frequently occur from the second half of November to the end of March. February is the driest month with of precipitation, and July the wettest with . The only natural hazards are occasional fast changes of weather with negative consequences, e.g. floodings.
Extreme values for years 2011 and 2012: 
An extremely cold day of 2011 had on average (23 February), and extremely hot day on average (24 August, . The year 2012 had the coldest day on 12 February with minimum plummeting to and maximum around with average . The hottest day of 2012 occurred on 21 August with daily maximum temperature and minimum staying on with all day average on . Absolute minimum and maximum for both years were (February 2012) and during August 2012.
Number of rainy/snowy days for 2011: 78; number of days with frost: 76; number of days with minimal temperatures below : 12; number of days with average temperature below zero: 35; number of days with daily average temperature higher than : 188; number of days with daily average higher than : 32. 
Total amount of precipitation for year 2011: ; average year humidity value: 80.8%. Maximal temperature: ; minimal temperature .
Average 2011 temperature: ; average speed of wind: , mainly from SSE.
Number of days with frost was 96 during year 2012; 18 days had minima below and 165 days with an average temperature on or above . Number of days with maxima on or above was 42.
History.
