Title: Res ipsa loquitur
Res ipsa loquitur (Latin: "the thing speaks for itself") is a doctrine in common law and Roman-Dutch law jurisdictions under which a court can infer negligence from the very nature of an accident or injury in the absence of direct evidence on how any defendant behaved in the context of tort litigation. Although specific criteria differ by jurisdiction, an action typically must satisfy the following elements of negligence: the existence of a duty of care, breach of appropriate standard of care, causation, and injury. In "res ipsa loquitur", the existence of the first three elements is inferred from the existence of injury that does not ordinarily occur without negligence.
History.
The term comes from Latin and is literally translated "the thing itself speaks", but the sense is well conveyed in the more common translation, "the thing speaks for itself". The earliest known use of the phrase was by Cicero in his defense speech "Pro Milone". The circumstances of the genesis of the phrase and application by Cicero in Roman legal trials has led to questions whether it reflects on the quality of "res ipsa loquitur" as a legal doctrine subsequent to 52 BC, some 1915 years before the English case "Byrne v Boadle" and the question whether Charles Edward Pollock might have taken direct inspiration from Cicero's application of the maxim in writing his judgment in that case.
Elements.
The first element may be satisfied in one of three ways:
The second element is discussed further in the section below. The third element requires the absence of contributory negligence from the plaintiff. The fourth element emphasizes that defendant may defeat a "res ipsa loquitur" claim by producing evidence of a non-negligent scenario that would completely explain plaintiff's injury and negate all possible inferences that negligence could have occurred.
Exclusive control requirement.
The common law traditionally required "the instrumentality or agent which caused the accident was under the exclusive control of the defendant". See e.g., "Eaton v. Eaton", 575 A2d 858 (NJ 1990). However, in the United States the second and the third versions of the Restatement of Torts eliminated the strict requirement because it can be difficult to prove "exclusive control". Accordingly, the element has largely given way in modern American cases to a less rigid formulation: the evidence must eliminate, to a sufficient degree, other responsible causes (including the conduct of the plaintiff and third parties). For example, in New York State, the defendant's exclusivity of control must be such that the likelihood of injury was more likely than not, the result of the defendant's negligence. The likelihood of other possibilities does not need to be eliminated altogether but must be so reduced that the greater probability lies with the defendant.
Here is a fictitious example:
In some cases, a closed group of people may be held in breach of a duty of care under the rule of "res ipsa loquitur". In "Ybarra v. Spangard", a patient undergoing surgery experienced back complications as a result of the surgery, but it could not be determined the specific member of the surgical team who had breached the duty so it was held that they had all breached, as it was certain that at least one of them was the only person who was in exclusive control of the instrumentality of harm.
In jurisdictions that employ this less rigid formulation of exclusive control, the element subsumes the element that the plaintiff did not contribute to his injury. In modern case law, contributory negligence is compared to the injury caused by the other. For example, if the negligence of the other is 95% of the cause of the plaintiff's injury, and the plaintiff is 5% responsible, the plaintiff's slight fault cannot negate the negligence of the other. The new type of split liability is commonly called "comparative negligence".
Typical in medical malpractice.
"Res ipsa loquitur" often arises in the "scalpel left behind" variety of case. For example, a person goes to a doctor with abdominal pains after having his appendix removed. X-rays show the patient has a metal object the size and shape of a scalpel in his abdomen. It requires no further explanation to show the surgeon who removed the appendix was negligent, as there is no legitimate reason for a doctor to leave a scalpel in a body at the end of an appendectomy.
Examples by jurisdictions.
Canada.
In Canada the doctrine of "res ipsa loquitur" has been largely overturned by the Supreme Court. In case of "Fontaine v. British Columbia (Official Administrator)" the Court rejected the use of "res ipsa loquitur" and instead proposed the rule that once the plaintiff has proven that the harm was under exclusive control of the defendant and that they were not contributorily negligent a tactical burden is placed on the defendant in which the judge has the discretion to infer negligence unless the defendant can produce evidence to the contrary.
Hong Kong.
Hong Kong is one of the common law jurisdictions that use the doctrine of "res ipsa loquitur".
Some lawyers prefer to avoid the expression "res ipsa loquitur" (for example, Hobhouse LJ in "Radcliff v. Plymouth"). But other lawyers (and judges too) still find the expression a convenient one (for example, see the judgement of Mr Justice Bokhary, a Permanent Judge of the Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong, in "Sanfield Building Contractors Ltd v. Li Kai Cheong").
