Title: Theology
Theology is the study of religious belief from a religious perspective. More narrowly it is the study of the nature of the divine. It is taught as an academic discipline, typically in universities and seminaries. It occupies itself with the unique content of analyzing the supernatural, but also deals with religious epistemology, asks and seeks to answer the question of revelation. Revelation pertains to the acceptance of God, gods, or deities, as not only transcendent or above the natural world, but also willing and able to interact with the natural world and to reveal themselves to humankind.
Theologians use various forms of analysis and argument (experiential, philosophical, ethnographic, historical, and others) to help understand, explain, test, critique, defend or promote any myriad of religious topics. As in philosophy of ethics and case law, arguments often assume the existence of previously resolved questions, and develop by making analogies from them to draw new inferences in new situations.
The study of theology may help a theologian more deeply understand their own religious tradition, another religious tradition, or it may enable them to explore the nature of divinity without reference to any specific tradition. Theology may be used to propagate, reform, or justify a religious tradition; or it may be used to compare, challenge (e.g. biblical criticism), or oppose (e.g. irreligion) a religious tradition or worldview. Theology might also help a theologian address some present situation or need through a religious tradition, or to explore possible ways of interpreting the world.
Etymology.
The term derives from the Greek "theologia" (θεολογία), a combination of "theos" (Θεός, 'god') and "logia" (λογία, 'utterances, sayings, oracles')—the latter word relating to Greek "logos" (λόγος, 'word, discourse, account, reasoning'). The term would pass on to Latin as , then French as , eventually becoming the English "theology".
Through several variants (e.g., "theologie", "teologye"), the English "theology" had evolved into its current form by 1362. The sense that the word has in English depends in large part on the sense that the Latin and Greek equivalents had acquired in patristic and medieval Christian usage although the English term has now spread beyond Christian contexts.
Classical philosophy.
Greek "theologia" (θεολογία) was used with the meaning 'discourse on God' around 380 BC by Plato in "The Republic". Aristotle divided theoretical philosophy into "mathematike", "physike", and "theologike", with the latter corresponding roughly to metaphysics, which, for Aristotle, included discourse on the nature of the divine.
Drawing on Greek Stoic sources, the Latin writer Varro distinguished three forms of such discourse:
Later usage.
Some Latin Christian authors, such as Tertullian and Augustine, followed Varro's threefold usage. However, Augustine also defined "theologia" as "reasoning or discussion concerning the Deity".
The Latin author Boethius, writing in the early 6th century, used "theologia" to denote a subdivision of philosophy as a subject of academic study, dealing with the motionless, incorporeal reality; as opposed to "physica", which deals with corporeal, moving realities. Boethius' definition influenced medieval Latin usage.
In patristic Greek Christian sources, "theologia" could refer narrowly to devout and/or inspired knowledge of and teaching about the essential nature of God.
In scholastic Latin sources, the term came to denote the rational study of the doctrines of the Christian religion, or (more precisely) the academic discipline that investigated the coherence and implications of the language and claims of the Bible and of the theological tradition (the latter often as represented in Peter Lombard's "Sentences", a book of extracts from the Church Fathers).
In the Renaissance, especially with Florentine Platonist apologists of Dante's poetics, the distinction between 'poetic theology' ("theologia poetica") and 'revealed' or Biblical theology serves as stepping stone for a revival of philosophy as independent of theological authority.
It is in the last sense, theology as an academic discipline involving rational study of Christian teaching, that the term passed into English in the 14th century, although it could also be used in the narrower sense found in Boethius and the Greek patristic authors, to mean rational study of the essential nature of God, a discourse now sometimes called theology proper.
From the 17th century onwards, the term "theology" began to be used to refer to the study of religious ideas and teachings that are not specifically Christian or correlated with Christianity (e.g., in the term "natural theology", which denoted theology based on reasoning from natural facts independent of specifically Christian revelation) or that are specific to another religion (such as below).
"Theology" can also be used in a derived sense to mean "a system of theoretical principles; an (impractical or rigid) ideology".
In religion.
