Title: Human evolution
Human evolution is the evolutionary process within the history of primates that led to the emergence of "Homo sapiens" as a distinct species of the hominid family that includes all the great apes. This process involved the gradual development of traits such as human bipedalism, dexterity, and complex language, as well as interbreeding with other hominins (a tribe of the African hominid subfamily), indicating that human evolution was not linear but weblike. The study of the origins of humans, also called anthropogeny, anthropogenesis, or anthropogony, involves several scientific disciplines, including physical and evolutionary anthropology, paleontology, and genetics.
Primates diverged from other mammals about (mya), in the Late Cretaceous period, with their earliest fossils appearing over 55 mya, during the Paleocene. Primates produced successive clades leading to the ape superfamily, which gave rise to the hominid and the gibbon families; these diverged some 15–20 mya. African and Asian hominids (including orangutans) diverged about 14 mya. Hominins (including the Australopithecine and Panina subtribes) parted from the Gorillini tribe (gorillas) between 8–9 mya; Australopithecine (including the extinct biped ancestors of humans) separated from the "Pan" genus (containing chimpanzees and bonobos) 4–7 mya. The "Homo" genus is evidenced by the appearance of "H. habilis" over 2 mya, while anatomically modern humans emerged in Africa approximately 300,000 years ago.
Before "Homo".
Early evolution of primates.
The evolutionary history of primates can be traced back 65 million years. One of the oldest known primate-like mammal species, the "Plesiadapis", came from North America; another, "Archicebus", came from China. Other similar basal primates were widespread in Eurasia and Africa during the tropical conditions of the Paleocene and Eocene.
David R. Begun concluded that early primates flourished in Eurasia and that a lineage leading to the African apes and humans, including to "Dryopithecus", migrated south from Europe or Western Asia into Africa. The surviving tropical population of primates—which is seen most completely in the Upper Eocene and lowermost Oligocene fossil beds of the Faiyum depression southwest of Cairo—gave rise to all extant primate species, including the lemurs of Madagascar, lorises of Southeast Asia, galagos or "bush babies" of Africa, and to the anthropoids, which are the Platyrrhines or New World monkeys, the Catarrhines or Old World monkeys, and the great apes, including humans and other hominids.
The earliest known catarrhine is "Kamoyapithecus" from the uppermost Oligocene at Eragaleit in the northern Great Rift Valley in Kenya, dated to 24 million years ago. Its ancestry is thought to be species related to "Aegyptopithecus", "Propliopithecus", and "Parapithecus" from the Faiyum, at around 35 mya. In 2010, "Saadanius" was described as a close relative of the last common ancestor of the crown catarrhines, and tentatively dated to 29–28 mya, helping to fill an 11-million-year gap in the fossil record.
In the Early Miocene, about 22 million years ago, the many kinds of arboreally-adapted (tree-dwelling) primitive catarrhines from East Africa suggest a long history of prior diversification. Fossils at 20 million years ago include fragments attributed to "Victoriapithecus", the earliest Old World monkey. Among the genera thought to be in the ape lineage leading up to 13 million years ago are "Proconsul", "Rangwapithecus", "Dendropithecus", "Limnopithecus", "Nacholapithecus", "Equatorius", "Nyanzapithecus", "Afropithecus", "Heliopithecus", and "Kenyapithecus", all from East Africa.
The presence of other generalized non-cercopithecids of Middle Miocene from sites far distant, such as "Otavipithecus" from cave deposits in Namibia, and "Pierolapithecus" and "Dryopithecus" from France, Spain and Austria, is evidence of a wide diversity of forms across Africa and the Mediterranean basin during the relatively warm and equable climatic regimes of the Early and Middle Miocene. The youngest of the Miocene hominoids, "Oreopithecus", is from coal beds in Italy that have been dated to 9 million years ago.
Molecular evidence indicates that the lineage of gibbons diverged from the line of great apes some 18–12 mya, and that of orangutans (subfamily Ponginae) diverged from the other great apes at about 12 million years; there are no fossils that clearly document the ancestry of gibbons, which may have originated in a so-far-unknown Southeast Asian hominoid population, but fossil proto-orangutans may be represented by "Sivapithecus" from India and "Griphopithecus" from Turkey, dated to around 10 mya.
Hominidae subfamily Homininae (African hominids) diverged from Ponginae (orangutans) about 14 mya. Hominins (including humans and the Australopithecine and Panina subtribes) parted from the Gorillini tribe (gorillas) between 8–9 mya; Australopithecine (including the extinct biped ancestors of humans) separated from the "Pan" genus (containing chimpanzees and bonobos) 4–7 mya. The "Homo" genus is evidenced by the appearance of "H. habilis" over 2 mya, while anatomically modern humans emerged in Africa approximately 300,000 years ago.
Divergence of the human clade from other great apes.
Species close to the last common ancestor of gorillas, chimpanzees and humans may be represented by "Nakalipithecus" fossils found in Kenya and "Ouranopithecus" found in Greece. Molecular evidence suggests that between 8 and 4 million years ago, first the gorillas, and then the chimpanzees (genus "Pan") split off from the line leading to the humans. Human DNA is approximately 98.4% identical to that of chimpanzees when comparing single nucleotide polymorphisms (see human evolutionary genetics). The fossil record, however, of gorillas and chimpanzees is limited; both poor preservation– rain forest soils tend to be acidic and dissolve bone– and sampling bias probably contribute to this problem.
Other hominins probably adapted to the drier environments outside the equatorial belt; and there they encountered antelope, hyenas, dogs, pigs, elephants, horses, and others. The equatorial belt contracted after about 8 million years ago, and there is very little fossil evidence for the split—thought to have occurred around that time—of the hominin lineage from the lineages of gorillas and chimpanzees. The earliest fossils argued by some to belong to the human lineage are "Sahelanthropus tchadensis" (7 Ma) and "Orrorin tugenensis" (6 Ma), followed by "Ardipithecus" (5.5–4.4 Ma), with species "Ar. kadabba" and "Ar. ramidus".
It has been argued in a study of the life history of "Ar. ramidus" that the species provides evidence for a suite of anatomical and behavioral adaptations in very early hominins unlike any species of extant great ape. This study demonstrated affinities between the skull morphology of "Ar. ramidus" and that of infant and juvenile chimpanzees, suggesting the species evolved a juvenalised or paedomorphic craniofacial morphology via heterochronic dissociation of growth trajectories. It was also argued that the species provides support for the notion that very early hominins, akin to bonobos ("Pan paniscus") the less aggressive species of the genus "Pan", may have evolved via the process of self-domestication. Consequently, arguing against the so-called "chimpanzee referential model" the authors suggest it is no longer tenable to use chimpanzee ("Pan troglodytes") social and mating behaviors in models of early hominin social evolution. When commenting on the absence of aggressive canine morphology in "Ar. ramidus" and the implications this has for the evolution of hominin social psychology, they wrote:
The authors argue that many of the basic human adaptations evolved in the ancient forest and woodland ecosystems of late Miocene and early Pliocene Africa. Consequently, they argue that humans may not represent evolution from a chimpanzee-like ancestor as has traditionally been supposed. This suggests many modern human adaptations represent phylogenetically deep traits and that the behavior and morphology of chimpanzees may have evolved subsequent to the split with the common ancestor they share with humans.
Genus "Australopithecus".
The genus "Australopithecus" evolved in eastern Africa around 4 million years ago before spreading throughout the continent and eventually becoming extinct 2 million years ago. During this time period various forms of australopiths existed, including "Australopithecus anamensis", "Au. afarensis", "Au. sediba", and "Au. africanus". There is still some debate among academics whether certain African hominid species of this time, such as "Au. robustus" and "Au. boisei", constitute members of the same genus; if so, they would be considered to be "Au. robust australopiths" whilst the others would be considered "Au. gracile australopiths". However, if these species do indeed constitute their own genus, then they may be given their own name, "Paranthropus".
A new proposed species "Australopithecus deyiremeda" is claimed to have been discovered living at the same time period of "Au. afarensis". There is debate if Au. deyiremeda is a new species or is "Au. afarensis." "Australopithecus prometheus", otherwise known as Little Foot has recently been dated at 3.67 million years old through a new dating technique, making the genus "Australopithecus" as old as "afarensis". Given the opposable big toe found on Little Foot, it seems that the specimen was a good climber. It is thought given the night predators of the region that he built a nesting platform at night in the trees in a similar fashion to chimpanzees and gorillas.
