Title: Viggo Brun
Viggo Brun (13 October 1885 – 15 August 1978) was a Norwegian professor, mathematician and number theorist.
Contributions.
In 1915, he introduced a new method, based on Legendre's version of the sieve of Eratosthenes, now known as the "Brun sieve", which addresses additive problems such as Goldbach's conjecture and the twin prime conjecture. He used it to prove that there exist infinitely many integers "n" such that "n" and "n"+2 have at most nine prime factors, and that all large even integers are the sum of two numbers with at most nine prime factors.
He also showed that the sum of the reciprocals of twin primes converges to a finite value, now called Brun's constant: by contrast, the sum of the reciprocals of all primes is divergent. He developed a multi-dimensional continued fraction algorithm in 1919–1920 and applied this to problems in musical theory. He also served as praeses of the Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters in 1946.
Biography.
Brun was born at Lier in Buskerud, Norway. He studied at the University of Oslo and began research at the University of Göttingen in 1910. In 1923, Brun became a professor at the 
Technical University in Trondheim and in 1946 a professor at the University of Oslo.
He retired in 1955 at the age of 70 and died in 1978 (at 92 years-old) at Drøbak in Akershus, Norway.
External links.
 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title: Buffy Summers
Buffy Anne Summers is the title character of the "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" franchise. She first appeared in the 1992 film "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" before going on to appear in The WB/UPN 1997–2003 television series and subsequent 1998–2018 Dark Horse and 2019–present Boom! Studios comic series of the same name. The character has also appeared in the spin-off series "Angel", as well as numerous expanded universe materials such as novels and video games. Buffy was portrayed by Kristy Swanson in the film and by Sarah Michelle Gellar in the television series. Giselle Loren has lent her voice to the character in both the "Buffy" video games and an unproduced animated series, while Kelly Albanese lent her voice to the character in the "Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight" motion comics.
Buffy Summers is the protagonist of the series, which depicts her life and adventures as she grows up. In the film, she is a high school cheerleader who learns that she is the Slayer (a Chosen One gifted with the strength and skills to fight vampires and the forces of darkness, as a vampire hunter and demon hunter). The television series shows Buffy carrying out her destiny in the small town of Sunnydale, built atop a portal to hell (Hellmouth), surrounded by a group of friends and family who support her in her mission. In the comic book continuation, she is a young woman who has accepted her duties and is now responsible for training others like her.
Buffy was created by Joss Whedon to subvert the stereotypical female horror film victim—Whedon wanted to create a strong female cultural icon. In 2004, Buffy was ranked 13th on Bravo's list of The 100 Greatest TV Characters. In June 2010, "Entertainment Weekly" ranked her third in its list of the 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years. AOL named her the sixth Most Memorable Female TV Character. She was ranked at No. 5 in AfterEllen.com's Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters.
Appearances.
Film.
