Title: Liquid consonant
Liquids are a class of consonants that consists of rhotics and voiced lateral approximants, sometimes described as "r-like sounds" and "l-like sounds". The word "liquid" seems to be a calque of the Ancient Greek word (, ) initially used by grammarian Dionysius Thrax to describe Greek sonorants.
Liquid consonants are more prone to be part of consonant clusters and of the syllable nucleus. Their third formants are generally non-predictable based on the first two formants. Another important feature is their complex articulation, which makes them a hard consonant class to study with precision and the last consonants to be produced by children during their phonological development. They are also more likely to undergo certain types of phonological changes such as assimilation, dissimilation and metathesis.
Most languages have at least one liquid in their phonemic inventory. English has two, /l/ and /ɹ/.
History and etymology.
The grammarian Dionysius Thrax used the Ancient Greek word (, ) to describe the sonorant consonants () of classical Greek. It is assumed that the term referred to their changing or inconsistent (or "fluid") effect on meter in classical Greek verse when they occur as the second member of a consonant cluster (see below). This word was calqued into Latin as (possibly because of a mistranslation), whence it has been retained in the Western European phonetic tradition.
Sonority and syllable structure.
In the sonority hierarchy, liquids are considered the most sonorous sounds after vowels and glides, with laterals considered to be less sonorous than rhotics. This explains why they are more likely to be part of consonant clusters than other consonants (excluding glides), and to follow obstruents in initial consonant clusters and precede them in final consonant clusters.
Liquids also hold this position in the hierarchy of syllable peaks, which means that liquids are theoretically more likely to be syllabic (or, in other words, be part of a syllable nucleus) than any other consonants, although some studies show that syllabic nasals are overall more favoured. Thus Czech and other Slavic languages allow their liquid consonants and to be the center of their syllables – as witnessed by the classic tonguetwister "push (your) finger through (your) throat." This is also true for General American English (see the words "barrel and "anchor) and other English accents.
Sequences of an obstruent and a liquid consonant are often ambiguous as far as syllabification is concerned. In these cases, whether the two consonants are part of the same syllable or not heavily depends on the individual language, and closely related languages can behave differently (such as Icelandic and Faroese). In Latin and Ancient Greek, obstruent + liquid consonant clusters (known as "muta cum liquida") supposedly were ambiguous in this sense, and as such were often used to manipulate meter.
Acoustic and articulatory phonetics.
Acoustically, liquids seem to have a third formant of unexpected value when compared to the first and second formants. This contrasts with non-liquid approximants, whose third formant value is expected based on the first two formants.
In articulatory phonetics, liquids are described as "controlled gestures," which are slower and require more precise tongue movement during the "homing phase", when the tongue adjusts towards the place of articulation of the consonant. Due to the fact that babies prefer "ballistic gestures", which rely on the propelling motion of the jaw, liquids usually occur later in a child's phonological development, and they are more likely to be deleted in consonant clusters before the age of three. Liquids have also been described as consonants involving "complex lingual geometries."
To better determine the full range of articulatory and acoustic characteristics of liquids, the use of ultrasound paired with audio recordings is increasing. This is due to this consonant group being difficult to analyse on a purely auditory base.
Liquids and phonological change.
Liquids seem to be more or less subjected to certain sound changes or phonological processes than other consonants. On an auditory level, liquid consonants resemble each other, which is likely the reason they undergo or trigger assimilation, dissimilation and metathesis.
Metathesis.
Cross-linguistically, liquids tend to be more prone to metathesis than other consonants, especially long-distance metathesis.
In Spanish, a frequent example is the behaviour of /r/ and /l/:
In English, "comfortable" is frequently pronounced /ˈkʌmf.tɚ.bəl/ in rhotic varieties, although its stem, "comfort" is pronounced /ˈkʌm.fɚt/, with the rhotic /ɹ/ in its original position.
